Tiêu đề: Skittles Experiment
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/skittles-experiment/
--------------------------------------------------

The infamous Skittles experiment is easy, low-cost, and provides lots of investigative opportunities. After trying with warm water, one idea is to use cold water, vinegar or fizzy drink to see if the final result is different.

The Skittles experiment is definitely a must-try science investigation for kids of all ages. It never gets any less impressive and is a great icebreaker activity or simple STEM Challenge.

A plate or container – preferably white

Skittles ( other coated sweets work, too )

Water – warm and cold

Place the Skittles or sweets into a white container and try to alternate the colours.

Carefully pour water into the container; if the skittles move, quickly push them back into place.

Watch what happens.

Experiment with different shapes and patterns of Skittles.

Skittles are coated in food colouring and sugar. When you pour water over the Skittles, the coloured coating dissolves, spreading through the water.

The colour and sugar dissolve into the water and then diffuse through it, making the water the colour of the sweet.

Time how long it takes the colours to reach the centre of the plate using cold and warm water.

Experiment with different clear liquids such as lemonade and vinegar.

Try using other sweets. Can you find any that work as well as Skittles?

Why do you think the colours don’t mix?

Can you spot the ‘S’ from the Skittles? What happens to it?

How can you speed up the reaction?

Do the colours mix eventually?

Use any spare Skittles to try some candy chromatography! Did you know that some Skittles contain more than one colour?

If you liked this activity, you’ll love my other candy science experiments!

How about one of my easy Roald Dahl themed activity ideas? Make potions for George, chocolate play dough for Charlie, a wormery for The Twits, an upside down house and lots more!

Playdough to Plato has a brilliant growing a gummy bear activity too. Who wouldn’t want a bigger gummy bear? Do you think it will taste as good as a small one?

If your children enjoyed this Skittles experiment, they’ll love my book, Snackable Science!

Affiliate links

Last Updated on January 27, 2025 by Emma Vanstone