Tiêu đề: Teen engineer finds eco-friendly way to fight harmful algal blooms
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/peroxide-fight-algal-blooms
--------------------------------------------------

A favorite Netflix series, Outer Banks, inspired her to help clean up a local lake

Teen engineer Natalie Muro built a device that gradually releases hydrogen peroxide into a lake to kill harmful algal blooms.

Adventure_Photo/iStock/Getty Images Plus

By Maria Temming

April 14, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

Harmful algal blooms plague waterways worldwide. Despite their name, not all are caused by algae. Many are due to overgrowth of toxin-producing cyanobacteria, whose toxins can sicken both people and animals. But chemicals currently used to fight harmful blooms, such as copper sulfate, can damage the environment. Natalie Muro, 18, now offers a more sustainable solution.

Through internet research, Natalie found that hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) would kill cyanobacteria. What’s more, this chemical does not release any dangerous byproducts. It breaks down to form just water and oxygen. So Natalie built a device that slowly releases H2O2 into water to kill algal blooms. She stored the chemical within a pipe attached to a buoy. Her gizmo also contains a porous charcoal-like material called biochar. It collects dead microbes. That way, other bacteria can’t dine on their dead brethren for nutrients.

Natalie tested her device in a lake near her home in Colorado Springs, Colo. The lake had been suffering a harmful algal bloom. But after exposure to Natalie’s device, water samples showed the lake had fewer cyanobacteria. These samples also confirmed that other microbes were not harmed by the treatment.

Natalie is currently a senior at William J. Palmer High School. Her research earned her a finalist spot at the 2026 Regeneron Science Talent Search. (That competition is run by Society for Science, which also publishes Science News Explores.) In this interview, Natalie shares her research experiences and advice.

Natalie’s teacher told her to research something she loves. She immediately thought of her favorite Netflix series: Outer Banks. The Atlantic coast–based show inspired her past projects on ocean science. This time, Natalie used her passion for water research to help her home state. “I began to research one of the big issues we have, which is harmful algal blooms,” she says.

“I really loved that I got to be able to test [my device] in a reservoir near my house,” Natalie says. “That had been a goal of mine — to actually be able to take my research from the lab into the field. I loved spending the time outside. I loved being able to go to the lake and actually see my device working.”

“The people,” Natalie says. “I have cold-emailed so many professors … to ask if they would meet with me on Zoom so I could bounce some ideas off of them.” Her mom was also a huge help, Natalie adds. “She was there through the early mornings, the late nights, every success, every failure. And I absolutely could not have done it without her support and her encouragement.”

“You never know unless you try,” Natalie says. Dare to start a new project, cold-email a professor or test an out-there idea. “Taking those leaps and having some bravery to approach people will get you the farthest in your research.”

Editor’s note: This story was updated on April 20, 2026 to clarify that not all “harmful algal blooms” are caused by algae.

algal bloom: The rapid and largely uncontrolled growth of any of various aquatic species in waterways that received a sudden influx of nutrients. They're generally referred to as algal blooms. Despite the name, however, not all algal blooms actually involve algae. Some are caused by bacteria, others by protists known as dinoflagellates.

bacteria: (singular: bacterium) Single-celled organisms. These dwell nearly everywhere on Earth, from the bottom of the sea to inside other living organisms (such as plants and animals). Bacteria are one of the three domains of life on Earth.

biochar: A type of charcoal often used in agriculture to improve soil for plant growth. It can help plants take up nutrients, improve soil drainage and increase crop yields.

bloom: (in microbiology) The rapid and largely uncontrolled growth of a species, such as algae in waterways enriched with nutrients.

chemical: A substance formed from two or more atoms that unite (bond) in a fixed proportion and structure. For example, water is a chemical made when two hydrogen atoms bond to one oxygen atom. Its chemical formula is H2O. Chemical also can be an adjective to describe properties of materials that are the result of various reactions between different compounds.

copper: A metallic chemical element in the same family as silver and gold. Because it is a good conductor of electricity, it is widely used in electronic devices.

cyanobacteria: A type of bacteria that can convert carbon dioxide into other molecules, including oxygen.

environment: The sum of all of the things that exist around some organism or the process and the condition those things create. Environment may refer to the weather and ecosystem in which some animal lives, or, perhaps, the temperature and humidity (or even the placement of things in the vicinity of an item of interest).

field: A term to describe a real-world environment in which some research is conducted, such as at sea, in a forest, on a mountaintop or on a city street. It is the opposite of an artificial setting, such as a research laboratory.

high school: A designation for grades nine through 12 in the U.S. system of compulsory public education. High-school graduates may apply to colleges for further, advanced education.

hydrogen peroxide: A molecule made of two hydrogen and two oxygen atoms. Highly reactive, it can kill many tiny organisms, including germs.

internet: An electronic communications network. It allows computers anywhere in the world to link into other networks to find information, download files and share data (including pictures).

nutrient: A vitamin, mineral, fat, carbohydrate or protein that a plant, animal or other organism requires as part of its food in order to survive.

oxygen: A gas that makes up about 21 percent of Earth's atmosphere. All animals and many microorganisms need oxygen to fuel their growth (and metabolism).

plague: (verb) A common term for being beset by unpleasant conditions, events or circumstances — ones that cause serious impacts.

porous: The description of a substance that contains tiny holes, called pores, through which a liquid or gas can pass.

reservoir: A large store of something — often a natural store of water, such as lakes or ponds.

Science Talent Search: An annual competition created and run by Society for Science. Begun in 1942, this event brings 40 research-oriented high school seniors to Washington, D.C. each year to showcase their research to the public and to compete for awards. Since spring 2016, this competition has been sponsored by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.

Society for Science: A nonprofit organization created in 1921 and based in Washington, D.C. Since its founding, the Society has been promoting not only public engagement in scientific research but also the public understanding of science. It created and continues to run two renowned high-school science competitions: the Regeneron Science Talent Search (begun in 1942) and the Regeneron International Science and Engineering Fair (created in 1950). A third, middle-school competition, launched in 2010, has since 2023 been known as the Thermo Fisher Scientific Junior Innovators Challenge. The Society also publishes award-winning journalism: in Science News (launched in 1922) and Science News Explores (created in 2003).

solution: A liquid in which one chemical has been dissolved into another.

sustainable: (n. sustainability) An adjective to describe the use of resources in a such a way that they will continue to be available long into the future.

toxin: A poison produced by living organisms, such as bacteria, algae and certain plants (such as poison ivy). Bees, spiders, snakes and other animals also produce toxins. These are referred to as venoms.

Maria Temming is the Assistant Managing Editor at Science News Explores. She has bachelor's degrees in physics and English, and a master's in science writing.

Readability Score: 7.3

HS-ETS1-3, MS-ETS1-2