Tiêu đề: Nature-inspired rocket-nozzle redesign stands by for liftoff
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/aerospike-rocket-nozzle-redesign
--------------------------------------------------

Three teens showed off their skin-inspired prototype design at the 2026 Regeneron ISEF

These bell-shaped engines, seen on the Saturn 5 rocket, are used throughout rocketry today. An aerospike engine would be more efficient but has been less heat-tolerant. Now, three teens have a fix that could help engineers think about jettisoning the bell-shaped engine.

pidjoe/E+/Getty Images Plus

By Katie Grace Carpenter

June 3, 2026 at 6:30 am

When it comes to rockets, bell-shaped engines are the norm. But they’re not the most efficient shape. Engineers have relied on this design only because it avoids a known overheating risk faced by a more efficient engine. Now, though, three 17-year-olds have redesigned the nozzle of the more efficient aerospike engine to better manage heat.

They’re hoping that one day their new tech might literally shoot for the stars.

Devin Wanchoo, Michael Obeng and Mazon Ben Chouikha attend Governor’s School at Innovation Park in Manassas, Va. Their new work began as a way to satisfy a class assignment. “We wanted to do something in aerospace. We wanted to do something involving biomimicry. And then we wanted to do something that no one has done before,” says Michael.

Those motivations led them to refine a better rocket system.

During their research, the young engineers learned that bell-shaped rocket engines become less powerful the higher they ascend. For decades, engineers have experimented with an alternative that would avoid this limitation: the aerospike engine.

Unfortunately, this design has its own big limitation: It shoots super-hot exhaust gases from the engine right up against its spike structure. Eventually, that heat can “cause the spike body to melt and crack under thermal stress,” Devin says.

Their work won these teens a spot here at the 2026 Regeneron International Science and Engineering Fair, or ISEF. The event is a program of the Society for Science (which also publishes this magazine). The young aerospike researchers were among 1,725 students — from 65 nations or territories — who competed at the 76th annual ISEF. These participants shared nearly $7 million in prizes.

Imagine a rocket launch. Flames burst downward from the engines and propel the rocket upward. Initially, the flames form a column.

If you were to fly alongside the rocket as it ascends, you’d eventually see the shape of that exhaust change. The column of gases would start to balloon outward.

During liftoff, high atmospheric pressure initially forces the gases into that column shape. But as the rocket climbs, the air pressure weakens — and so does control of the exhaust gases. Now they spread out, reducing lift.

The thrust must go down for the rocket to go up. But higher up, as the gases balloon out, bell-shaped engines “can lose up to 30 percent of their efficiency,” says Devin.

Engineers have been looking to overcome that. And the aerospike engine is one possible solution.

“Unlike a bell nozzle — which needs that giant encasing structure — the aerospike just has its central spike,” Devin explains. It will deliver a strong, reliable upward thrust as long as you have some way “to force gases [down] along the spike wall.”

Those gases flow along the spike’s surface. The spike acts as a guide to direct the gases down so they can’t spread out. But that guiding spike introduces its own problem.

Coming from the engine, exhaust gases “are extremely hot,” notes Michael. The spike’s tip takes a pummeling from those gases. Their heat is “essentially attacking it, attacking it, attacking it,” he says.

What’s more, those gases tend to recirculate along the spike. This helps counter the air pressure’s attempt to weaken the downward flow of the gases, Michael says. Unfortunately, he adds, it also increases the heat.

So what makes this engine so good at maintaining a strong downward flow of exhaust gases, Devin points out, “is the same thing that causes that very aggressive heating of the spike body.”

Typical cooling methods just haven’t been good enough to spare the spike.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

To counter that, the trio looked for inspiration in nature. Living things have evolved different ways to cool themselves. The team considered plant veins, insect exoskeletons, shark tissues and more. Then the trio created ICARUS, a machine-learning algorithm, and used it to test bio-based cooling strategies.

ICARUS, says Devin, is “probably the most novel part” of their project. It’s a simpler, heat-driven version of tools used by the aerospace industry. And it does more than just test ideas. “We built it on a machine-learning layer that was able to suggest [spike shapes] to try,” Devin says.

The young engineers started with shapes suggested by nature. Then they used ICARUS to optimize those designs. For instance, says Mazon, his team might suggest a certain surface pattern or feature. Then ICARUS “might change the width of it [or] the depth of it” to optimize the spike’s heat resistance.

The approach worked. Heat flux refers to how fast heat moves through a material. “We were able to reduce temperatures and heat flux by up to 40 percent,” Devin says.

Human skin inspired their most successful design, Devin says. Pores in our skin release sweat. As it evaporates, it wicks away heat. Mimicking this trick helped “bleed propellant to fight back against that heat creep,” says Devin.

Using what they learned from ICARUS, the team members 3-D printed models of the six most promising designs. Then they put the models under a heat gun and measured how long each took to reach 90° and 110° Celsius (194° and 230° Fahrenheit), says Devin. They also tracked at what temps the models began to warp.

Then they built a copper prototype of their best-performing model. In the final stage of testing, Michael says, they became the first high school students to ever do a cold-flow test on such an engine. A cold-flow test, explains Devin, is “just testing that your engine can pressurize properly and that propellants are flowing.”

This test was “pretty cool,” he says. “We got to verify our ICARUS predictions.”

ICARUS can also offer design tips beyond rocketry, Mazon says. For instance, the surface patterns designed to manage heat could even be applied to homes. “If you were to put [these patterns] on wood and you built the house, then it’s very likely to be safer” in terms of withstanding wildfires, he says.

For their work, Devin, Michael and Mazon took home fourth place — and $600 — in ISEF’s Engineering Technology: Statics and Dynamics division.

3-D: Short for three-dimensional. This term is an adjective for something that has features that can be described in three dimensions — height, width and length.

aerospace: A research field devoted to the study of Earth’s atmosphere and the space beyond or to aircraft that travel in the atmosphere and space.

air pressure: The force exerted by the weight of air molecules.

algorithm: A group of rules or procedures for solving a problem in a series of steps. Algorithms are used in mathematics and in computer programs for figuring out solutions.

annual: Adjective for something that happens every year.

atmospheric pressure: The pressure exerted by the weight of the atmosphere.

cavity: (in geology or physics) A large rigid pocketlike structure.

computational: Adjective referring to some process that relies on a computer’s analyses.

degrade: To break down into smaller, simpler materials — as when wood rots or as a flag that’s left outdoors in the weather will fray, fade and fall apart. (in chemistry) To break down a compound into smaller components.

engine: A machine designed to convert energy into useful mechanical motion. Sometimes an engine is called a motor. (in computer science) A computer program that performs a particular, narrow range of functions.

engineering: The field of research that uses math and science to solve practical problems. Someone who works in this field is known as an engineer.

evaporate: To turn from liquid into vapor.

exhaust: (in engineering) The gases and fine particles emitted — often at high speed and/or pressure — by combustion (burning) or by the heating of air. Exhaust gases are usually a form of waste.

exoskeleton: A hard, protective outer body covering of many animals that lack a true skeleton, such as an insect, crustacean or mollusk. The exoskeletons of insects and crustaceans are largely made of chitin.

flux: A term for the flow of some liquid, sometimes described as a measured rate of flow (such as liters per hour). Or it can refer to a substance used to enhance the fusion of metals or minerals (such as the rosin used to aid in the soldering of metals).

force: Some outside influence that can change the motion of an object, hold objects close to one another, or produce motion or stress in a stationary object.

high school: A designation for grades nine through 12 in the U.S. system of compulsory public education. High-school graduates may apply to colleges for further, advanced education.

innovation: (v. to innovate; adj. innovative) An adaptation or improvement to an existing idea, process or product that is new, clever, more effective or more practical.

lift: An upward force on an object. It may occur when an object (such as a balloon) is filled with a gas that weighs less than air; it can also result when a low-pressure area occurs above an object (such as an airplane wing).

literally: An adjective indicating that the phrase it modifies is precisely true. For instance, to say: "It's so cold that I'm literally dying," means that this person actually expects to soon be dead, the result of getting too cold.

model: A simulation of a real-world event (usually using a computer) that has been developed to predict one or more likely outcomes. Or an individual that is meant to display how something would work in or look on others.

novel: Something that is clever or unusual and new, as in never seen before.

nozzle: A round spout or slot at the end of a pipe, hose or tube. Nozzles are typically used to control the flow of a jet of some high-pressure liquid or gas.

pore: A tiny hole in a surface. On the skin, substances such as oil, water and sweat pass through these openings.

pressure: Force applied uniformly over a surface, measured as force per unit of area.

prototype: A first or early model of some device, system or product that still needs to be perfected.

risk: The chance or mathematical likelihood that some bad thing might happen. For instance, exposure to radiation poses a risk of cancer. Or the hazard — or peril — itself. (For instance: Among cancer risks that the people faced were radiation and drinking water tainted with arsenic.)

rocket: Something propelled into the air or through space, sometimes as a weapon of war. A rocket usually is lofted by the release of exhaust gases as some fuel burns. (v.) Something that flings into space at high speed as if fueled by combustion.

shark: A type of predatory fish that has survived in one form or another for hundreds of millions of years. Cartilage, not bone, gives its body structure. Like skates and rays, sharks belong to a group known as elasmobranchs. They tend to grow and mature slowly and have few young. Some lay eggs, others give birth to live young.

thermal: Of or relating to heat.

thrust: A force that makes an object move forward.

vein: (in botany) The tubular system made up of xylem and phloem cells that a plant uses to transport materials (water and sugars, for instance) throughout its structures above- and below-ground.

verify: (n. verification) To demonstrate or confirm in some way that a particular claim or suspicion is true.

warp: A change in the shape, usually due to some twisting or curving in a normally flat surface or plane. A piece of wet lumber may warp as it dries unevenly, causing it to bow or show a slight twist.

Meeting: ​​ M.B. Chouikha, M. Obeng and D. Wanchoo. Aerocool. 2026 Regeneron International Science and Engineering Fair (ISEF),​ ​ Phoenix, Ariz.,​ May​ ​10-15,​ ​2026.​ ​ ​Engineering Technology: Statics & Dynamics,​​ ETSD025T.

Journal: I.R. Cardenas, S. Lain and O.D.Lopez. A review of aerospike nozzles: current trends in aerospace applications. Aerospace. Vol. 12, June 2025. doi: 10.3390/aerospace12060519.

Katie Grace Carpenter is a science writer and curriculum developer, with degrees in biology and biogeochemistry. She also writes science fiction and creates science videos. Katie lives in the U.S. but also spends time in Sweden with her husband, who’s a chef.

Readability Score: 7.4

HS-ETS1-1, MS-ETS1-1