Tiêu đề: Summer Science Challenges for Kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/summer-science-challenges/
--------------------------------------------------

Our Summer holidays are about to start, so I thought it would be a good time to spruce up this post full of Summer Science Challenges for kids. All the activities are very simple and use mostly things you probably already have around the house.

For an ultimate summer of science, try one activity each day, or just pick and choose the ones you like when you have a bit of spare time!

Science challenges are great as they give children the opportunity to work with more freedom than a traditional science experiment. Open-ended challenges can be great for teamwork and independent creative thinking. They’re also great for a parent/child project, too!

The lovely Mrs Mactivity has created some fun printable science challenges that you can cut out and use as prompts. Scroll to the bottom of the post to download.

If you haven’t heard of Mrs Mactivity, do go and take a look at her website; she has some wonderful primary resources available.

A sugar cube tower is a fantastic, inexpensive STEM challenge. Children can build tall towers or bigger structures.

All you need to make a lava lamp is oil, water and an Alka Seltzer or effervescent vitamin tablet. These are great as they can be used over and over again. Just wait for the reaction to stop, add a bit more Alka Seltzer, and it’ll start all over again!

Use coffee or tea to colour paper and create a fun treasure map.

This is great for experimenting with different concentrations of liquid. A more concentrated tea or coffee solution will give a darker coloured map.

Mix a little lemon or lime juice with water and write a message on a piece of paper.

Ask an adult to put it in the oven, and the message will appear.

Can you build something functional with a cardboard box?

We added a kitchen roll holder and space for a sink to our cardboard kitchen.

Make a delicious dessert with a solar oven! This is a great activity for learning about reflecting and absorbing materials.

Design a sinking and floating experiment. This is a great paddling pool science activity on a warm summer day.

Children can make predictions first, then investigate to see if they’re correct. Some items might surprise them!

Use cardboard discs to make spinning pens. You can make these with paper and thinner or thicker card to see which works best.

Drop a mento into a bottle of fizzy drink and watch what happens. Remember to stand back and drop the mento in as fast as you can!

As an extra challenge, kids can investigate whether low sugar drinks erupt better than full sugar varieties.

The coke and mento reaction is a science activity everyone should try at least once.

Can you predict which substances will react with baking soda? Were your predictions correct?

Looking for bugs is a fantastic summer science challenge that doesn’t cost anything. Download my FREE bug hunt template to make it even easier!

Something like our Humpty Dumpty egg drop experiment always works well. The idea is to place an egg in a bag filled with a protective material and then drop the bag to investigate which material best protects the egg.

Blow up a balloon with Alka Seltzer or an effervescent vitamin tablet. Alka Seltzer and water react together, releasing carbon dioxide gas. The gas fills the space in the container and then fills the balloon, inflating it!

Warning – marshmallow and straw towers can be a bit sticky, but is great fun and a fantastic team building science activity.

Design and build a LEGO marble maze? Or use marbles inside a cardboard box.

The volcano below is made using papier mache, but sand also works well!

Check out our baking soda volcano ideas for inspiration.

Set up some simple baking soda reactions outdoors. These could be fairy themed, witchy potions or just simple messy play.

Play a tune using water and glass bottles. If you don’t have glass bottles, make a guitar by stretching elastic bands over a cardboard box.

You can’t really create a square bubble, but you can create something that looks like a square bubble using a cube frame dipped in bubble mix.

Build a house from sweets. We usually experiment with different types of “glue” to find out which works the best.

Once the house is built, the fun bit is testing how strong it is!

Try some ice painting, simply freeze a sheet of ice or an ice shape and paint over the top. Once finished, you can wipe away your creation and start over.

Search for the colours of the rainbow in a bubble. When light from the sun shines through the bubbles, it is reflected and dispersed, splitting white light into its different wavelengths and revealing all the colours of the rainbow!

Can you split light into a rainbow using a prism?

Use ice and salt to make ice cream from milk. This is a delicious activity for a sunny day. The salt lowers the freezing point of the ice, which then draws heat from the milk mixture, causing it to freeze.

Can you dissect a flower and separate the parts? Do you know the function of each?

Make a fairy potion, collect flowers and herbs to make a lovely smelling potion. Does the water change colour? Which smells are the strongest?

Make jumping frogs from tissue paper to learn about static electricity? The tissue paper frogs jump up to a balloon charged with static electricity.

Make a volcano with sand. We covered this one with cling film to keep the sand clean and then made a food colouring, baking soda and water mix for the eruption.

Create a fizzy baking soda explosion using baking soda, vinegar and food colouring. This is a fantastic way to learn about chemical reactions in a fun, hands-on and visual way.

Build a raft with sticks and test to see if it floats. Children can try to waterproof the bottom of the raft and add toy animals or other objects as an extension task.

Design and build a cork boat, and then test it to see if it floats. This is a great challenge for learning about buoyancy.

Can you spot a rainbow in a spray of water? This is an easy way to see light split into its constituent colours!

Use a salad spinner to make a spin art picture. These look amazing and are super easy to make.

Create colourful slime using cornstarch, water, and food colouring.

Scrunch it to make it solid and then watch it run through your fingers as it turns into a liquid!

Make a football in a box game by blowing down a straw to move marbles covered in paint. Try blowing softly and then harder to see how the marble moves.

Can you make a playdough brain? This is a fantastic way to learn about the various parts of the brain and their functions.

Try a bit of science magic and make an egg float. All you need for this simple science trick is an egg, jug, water and salt.

Do you know why pizza dough rises ? Find out while making a delicious meal!

Make raisins dance around a glass with some clever science. Adding baking soda causes the raisins to move around, as if they’re dancing!

We used our giant catapult as a tennis ball launcher, but you could also try using water balloons or table tennis balls.

New for 2018 are these amazing Science Challenge printable cards, created by the wonderful Mrs Mactivity for us.

If these aren’t quite what you’re looking for, try one of my other fun science experiments for kids.

Last Updated on August 20, 2025 by Emma Vanstone