Tiêu đề: Easy Easter STEM Projects to do with Kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/easy-easter-stem-projects-to-do-with-kids/
--------------------------------------------------

If you’re looking for easy creative ideas to keep the kids busy over Easter, you’re in the right place. These Easter STEM projects are simple, use equipment you probably already have, and most importantly, are great fun!

Raid your recycle bin and get ready for hours of science fun!

Last year, we spent hours setting up different egg chain reactions. These are great because you can just use whatever you have around the house. Line up books like dominoes, roll balls into cars, cars down a ramp, or even roll eggs. You can make it as simple or as complex as you like.

One year, we made a huge outdoor chain reaction that involved rolling a giant ball down a slide.

My egg chain reaction planner adds a bit of structure to the activity so children can think about how they set up each stage beforehand.

Construct a conveyor belt for eggs. I used cardboard eggs, but you could try to make it strong enough to transport mini eggs!

The conveyor belt is just paper wrapped around a dowel. The paper is attached at each end with tape and wound around one end.

This is one of my most popular Easter STEM Challenges! Build an outdoor mini zip line for a small chocolate egg. You can also scale this up and use a large chocolate egg, or make a mini version with a small chocolate egg.

Build a parachute for an egg using paper, cloth or even an old plastic bag. If you don’t want to build a parachute, try wrapping the egg in different materials to protect it from a fall.

Another idea is to find a large tube and drop eggs wrapped in different materials down it to see if they break!

Use a pneumatics system to make a cardboard egg open up to reveal a chick!

This principle would work for lots of different themes. Dinosaurs are next on our list!

Build a vehicle to protect an egg in a collision! This could be made of K’nex, LEGO, or recycled materials.

A simple twist on this idea is to wrap an egg in protective materials such as paper or bubble wrap and drop it down a cardboard tube.

Did you know you can grow carrots from carrot tops?

These Easter egg pom pom poppers from Teach Beside Me look great!

STEM Laboratory has some fantastic plastic egg chick rockets!

Create a robo hand to pick up Easter eggs!

Make a boat for Peeps like Schooling a Monkey!

Last Updated on March 31, 2026 by Emma Vanstone