Tiêu đề: This evolutionary biologist fuses art into her science
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/evolutionary-biologist-fuses-art-science
--------------------------------------------------

Victoria Glynn has turned to art to reach learners from different backgrounds

Victoria Glynn initially saw her interests in art and scuba diving as separate from her work in science. But both have helped shape her career path. "The experiences you may not see as valuable in professional settings may be what sets you apart," says this evolutionary biologist.

Su Reid-St. John

By Aaron Tremper

June 11, 2026 at 6:30 am

When Victoria Glynn was a teen living in Honduras, she enjoyed making art. But that wasn’t her only interest. “Growing up in Central America, I was just surrounded by all of this amazing biodiversity,” she says. So, when it came to college, Glynn opted to study environmental science.

For undergrad studies, Glynn moved to the United States to attend the University of California, Berkeley. While there, she worked in a lab that genetically engineered yeast to produce biofuel. But she had a problem: Glynn was struggling to find diagrams to accompany talks about her research. Her mom suggested that she use her skills in art and make her own. “At the time, I wasn’t seeing other people doing that,” Glynn says. “It felt like science was in one corner, and all the arts and humanities were in the other.”

Glynn soon found other ways to bridge science and art. As an undergrad, she taught refugees and children who had recently arrived in the United States. She sometimes worked in classrooms where the students spoke many different languages. Art became a “common language for all of us to be on the same page,” she says.

Now as a visiting researcher at the University of Connecticut, Avery Point, Glynn studies how plankton are adapting to high temperatures. In this interview, she shares her experiences and advice with Science News Explores. (This interview has been edited for content and readability.)

I think what really inspired me was an undergrad class at Berkeley. One of my best friends recommended that I take this particular genetics course. I was unsure since the course wasn’t a requirement for my degree. The class seemed very removed from my interests at the time, but I still decided to enroll. I felt college was a time to explore and learn from various fields.

I remember something just clicking in my brain during one of the first lectures. Genetics and DNA felt so powerful. All organisms have DNA, which means you can track it and directly measure how it’s changing over time. Essentially, how it is evolving and mutating. After this class, I really wanted to dive into this topic more deeply.

I didn’t do a lot of marine biology work until I was in my PhD. The lab I joined for my PhD at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, was looking for someone who did genetics work, preferably in marine invertebrates. I happened to fit the bill and was interested in the project. We would take corals from their home environment and bring them onto a boat to conduct temperature stress experiments. We were interested in seeing how they build up resistance to bleaching.

Corals are beautiful animals, but they’re very hard to rear in the lab. They’re very delicate animals that do not like being in tanks. They even struggle out on the reef. That unpredictability makes experiments very difficult.

For my post-doc, I switched to studying plankton to better understand how marine organisms are being affected by warming oceans. I needed an animal that could evolve quickly over multiple generations. Plankton are much easier to grow. In as little as 11 days, you can have adult plankton that lay eggs. Compare that to corals. Some species are so long-lived that they will not reproduce within our lifetime.

I loved being an environmental science major, but I often missed that human connection when spending time in the lab. I also felt that sometimes the best researchers were not always the best at communicating their work with the general public. I wanted to share what I was learning with those who are the most affected.

Improved science communication leads to better science. In turn, embracing different backgrounds improves science education. It allows more people who are taking these courses to feel empowered and actually pursue STEM degrees. [STEM stands for science, technology, engineering and math.]

Both of my parents are divers. When I was younger, they would always talk about it. Honduras is also one of the most affordable places to get dive certified. So when I turned 12, I decided to go for it.

As I was applying for my PhD, my mother suggested that I add diving onto my CV. [A CV, or curriculum vitae, is the academic version of a resume.] I doubted whether people were going to care but added it anyway. That was the one line out of my entire CV that my future PhD advisor picked out during our interview. He was looking for someone who could handle both diving in the field and doing molecular work in the lab.

That taught me that the experiences you may not see as valuable in professional settings may be what sets you apart. You don’t know where these experiences are going to lead.

Oftentimes, you find the most unlikely mentors outside of your direct field of study. I think those can be the most important. Sometimes, those people gave me more powerful personal advice than my formal supervisors did. STEM degrees are difficult. But with a good support system, anything is possible.

academic: Relating to school, classes or things taught by teachers in formal institutes of learning (such as a college).

biology: The study of living things. The scientists who study them are known as biologists.

coral: Marine animals that often produce a hard and stony exoskeleton and tend to live on reefs (the exoskeletons of dead ancestor corals).

curriculum: (plural: curricula) The official classroom materials (often readings) used to lead students through a course of study on a particular topic.

DNA: (short for deoxyribonucleic acid) A long, double-stranded and spiral-shaped molecule inside most living cells that carries genetic instructions. It is built on a backbone of phosphorus, oxygen, and carbon atoms. In all living things, from plants and animals to microbes, these instructions tell cells which molecules to make.

environment: The sum of all of the things that exist around some organism or the process and the condition those things create. Environment may refer to the weather and ecosystem in which some animal lives, or, perhaps, the temperature and humidity (or even the placement of things in the vicinity of an item of interest).

environmental science: The study of ecosystems to help identify environmental problems and possible solutions. Environmental science can bring together many fields including physics, chemistry, biology and oceanography to understand how ecosystems function and how humans can coexist with them in harmony. People who work in this field are known as environmental scientists.

evolve: (adj. evolving) To change gradually over generations, or a long period of time. In living organisms, such an evolution usually involves random changes to genes that will then be passed along to an individual’s offspring. These can lead to new traits, such as altered coloration, new susceptibility to disease or protection from it, or different shaped features (such as legs, antennae, toes or internal organs).

extract: (v.) To separate one chemical (or component of something) from a complex mix. (noun)

field: An area of study, as in: Her field of research is biology. Also a term to describe a real-world environment in which some research is conducted, such as at sea, in a forest, on a mountaintop or on a city street. It is the opposite of an artificial setting, such as a research laboratory.

generation: A group of individuals (in any species) born at about the same time or that are regarded as a single group. Your parents belong to one generation of your family, for example, and your grandparents to another. Similarly, you and everyone within a few years of your age across the planet are referred to as belonging to a particular generation of humans.

genetic: Having to do with chromosomes, DNA and the genes contained within DNA. The field of science dealing with these biological instructions is known as genetics. People who work in this field are geneticists.

infographic: A chart, table, diagram, photos or drawings together with data that present information in a largely visual way. In these presentations, text is kept to a minimum.

information: (as opposed to data) Facts provided or trends learned about something or someone, often as a result of studying data.

invertebrate: An animal lacking a backbone. About 90 percent of animal species are invertebrates.

marine: Having to do with the ocean world or environment.

mentor: An individual who lends his or her experience to advise someone starting out in a field. In science, teachers or researchers often mentor students or younger scientists by helping them to refine their research questions. Mentors also can offer feedback on how young investigators prepare to conduct research or interpret their data.

organism: Any living thing, from elephants and plants to bacteria and other types of single-celled life.

PhD: (also known as a doctorate) A type of advanced degree offered by universities — typically after five or six years of study — for work that creates new knowledge. People qualify to begin this type of graduate study only after having first completed a college degree (a program that typically takes four years of study).

plankton: (sing. plankter) Small organisms that largely drift or float in the sea. Depending on the species, plankton range from microscopic sizes to organisms about the size of a flea. Some are tiny animals. Others are plant-like organisms. Although an individual plankter is very small, these organisms often form massive colonies, numbering in the billions. The largest animal in the world, the blue whale, lives on plankton.

post-doctoral scholar, or post-doc: A research position for people who have just completed their doctorate in some field of study. It allows the individual to acquire new skills or pursue new lines of research on the road to a research career.

reef: A ridge of rock, coral or sand. It rises up from the seafloor and may come to just above or just under the water’s surface.

refuge: Some place that provides safety, such as protection from danger, discomfort or pursuit. For instance, a cave could provide refuge from the storm.

resilience: The ability to recover quickly from a setback.

scuba diving: A form of underwater diving in which the person carries special equipment in order to breathe, including a tank of air and a breathing mask. The word scuba is short for self-contained underwater breathing apparatus.

stress: (in biology) A factor — such as unusual temperatures, movements, moisture or pollution — that affects the health of a species or ecosystem.

yeast: One-celled fungi that can ferment carbohydrates (like sugars), producing carbon dioxide and alcohol. They also play a pivotal role in making many baked products rise.

Aaron Tremper is the assistant editor for Science News Explores. He has a B.A. in English (with minors in creative writing and film production) from SUNY New Paltz and an M.A. in Journalism from the Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism’s Science and Health Reporting program. A former intern at Audubon magazine and Atlanta’s NPR station, WABE 90.1 FM, he has reported a wide range of science stories for radio, print, and digital media. His favorite reporting adventure? Tagging along with researchers studying bottlenose dolphins off of New York City and Long Island, NY.

Readability Score: 7.4

HS-LS2-2, MS-LS2-4