Tiêu đề: Summer Science for Hot Days
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/10-fun-science-activities-for-hot-days/
--------------------------------------------------

The UK is getting ready for a mini heatwave, so today I’m sharing some fun, cooling summer science experiments that are great for kids of all ages on a sunny day!

Sometimes, science experiments outside feel so much easier than making a mess inside. They are a great way to keep kids entertained during school holidays. A mini outdoor lab is easy to set up, and kids can keep coming back to it all summer long.

We love making slushy drinks with ice and salt, tracking the sun’s movement with a DIY sundial, and, of course, making delicious s’mores!

What are you waiting for? Grab some supplies and fill your summer with science experiments and STEM challenges.

One of our favourite summer activities is exploring the melting and mixing of colours by making slushy drinks with fruity ice.

You’ll need salt, ice, two sealable plastic food bags and various fruit juices to make a colourful slushy drink in minutes!

Painting on a sheet of ice is a lovely, creative science activity for summer. The paint slips beautifully over the ice, making it a fantastic sensory activity and a creative way to learn about melting and changes of state.

Make ice cubes and investigate where they melt the fastest. Try them inside, in the fridge, outdoors in the sunshine and outdoors in the shade.

Or, try creating an ice excavation. You could go all out and make a huge one or set up lots of mini icy rescues.

Find out why salt melts ice, and use your new knowledge to make ice cream in a bag or cool a drink down quickly.

The ice and salt trick means you can have cold ice cream made from flavoured milk or a chilly, refreshing drink ready in less than 5 minutes!

If you have a paddling pool, I have 5 paddling pool science activities that make playing in the pool even more fun than usual!

Challenge your friends to a lolly stick race. These are great fun and an unusual water table or paddling pool activity.

Once you’ve finished racing, use the soapy water to clean outdoor toys!

Finally, testing objects to see whether they sink or float is always fun! Older children can try wrapping objects that sink in bubble wrap to find out if reducing their density helps them float, or make mini boats for sinking objects.

Do you love ice cream? How about making some ice cream soup like Rainy Day Mum? Melty ice cream in the sun is a lovely, tasty treat and a delicious way to learn.

Or, make s’mores in an easy garden solar oven?

Cool a drink quickly using the cooling power of ice and salt. This uses the same science concept as ice cream in a bag.

Adding salt to a mixture of ice and water lowers the freezing point of the ice. The melting ice draws heat from the drink, cooling it down!

Track the movement of the sun with a sundial made with a stick or straw. This sundial looks impressive and is a very visual way to see how the sun’s position changes throughout the day.

Little ones love a water wall, and it’s easy to make a DIY version using my homemade water wall ideas. Water walls are a great design challenge for older children, too.

Shadow frames are brilliant fun. Another idea is to make an empty frame and draw a picture in the middle to cast a shadow!

Drawing the shadow a toy creates is a simple, creative activity that allows children to observe how the shape of the shadow changes throughout the day.

Our 50 fun summer science activities will keep you busy all summer long!

If you prefer a challenge, my summer science challenges could be just what you’re looking for! NOW with FREE printable challenge cards!

Last Updated on May 21, 2026 by Emma Vanstone