Tiêu đề: Some of these Smithsonian secrets might just blow your mind
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/smithsonian-museum-collection-secrets
--------------------------------------------------

See them in our behind-the-scenes look at a storage site usually open to only select visitors

The Smithsonian’s Museum Support Center houses nearly 150 million items. Its haul includes giant worms preserved in alcohol.

Stephen Voss

Text By Meghan RosenPhotos By Stephen Voss

June 4, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

Readability Score: 6.4

HS-LS4-1, MS-LS4-1

Meteorites that are billions of years old. Alienlike worms. A blue whale’s massive jaw bones. These are just some of the millions of marvels at the Smithsonian Institution.

Most are part of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural History collection, a trove of nearly 150 million objects. It includes a spectacular array of preserved life forms, rocks and cultural artifacts from around the world.

Few people have ever seen this vast collection of astonishing objects. The museum in Washington, D.C., only displays a small share of the items. Most sit tucked away in huge storage pods at the Smithsonian’s Museum Support Center (MSC). This site in Suitland, Md., is not open to the public.

But Science News was able to get a behind-the-scenes peek.

Lining MSC’s hushed halls are rows of cream-colored cabinets and kilometers (miles) of shelving. Scientists led us through long corridors, pointing out prime treasures along the way. We saw and touched an abundance of specimens that captivate the mind and eyes. Some items even had odors — like a freeze-dried crabeater seal. It smelled like burnt soy sauce.

But MSC is not just a giant storage unit. It’s a place scientists visit to do research and answer big questions about our planet. Forget the idea that museums are old and dusty, says Kirk Johnson. He’s the director of the National Museum of Natural History. Museums, he argues, are “vastly more vibrant and more important” than most people realize.

MSC opened in 1983 when the Smithsonian needed more space for items in its already overcrowded natural history museum. Each of the center’s five storage pods is about the size of a football field. And they’re nearly three stories tall. A sixth pod is in the works.

Their key goal: Protect the specimens.

MSC carefully controls the temperature and humidity inside each pod. It also shields these storage areas against pests.

148 million Items in the museum’s collection

11,945Items on display at the museum

95,287New items acquired in 2025

34.5 million +Items in the entomology collection

Security guards patrol the premises 24/7. Along the way, they watch for power outages, floods, flames and explosions. Huge freezers need power to keep tissues and DNA samples ultracold. Dried specimens can be damaged by fire and water. And wet items in alcohol-filled jars are at risk of drying out — or blowing up.

MSC’s stash is part of a “forever” collection. They’re available to study today and in the future. Scientists are now, for instance, analyzing African elephant DNA stored here. The elephant that this genetic material comes from is thought to belong to a population that has long evaded humans.

Past work on bird eggs collected decades ago helped reveal that the insecticide DDT had built up in their shells and thinned them. This nearly drove some species — including the bald eagle — to extinction. Evidence of DDT’s harm to wildlife helped lead the United States to ban the chemical in 1972.

“There’s a cloud of knowledge about the planet that exists only because we have collections in museums,” Johnson says.

Scientists who work here are passionate about the knowledge stored in MSC’s pods. As we moved from one area to another, staff members would race to show us “just one more thing!” A coil of feathered money, for instance, that was once used on the Santa Cruz Islands in the South Pacific.

Items stowed at the MSC or on display at the museum represent everything that we know about the planet, says Rebecca Johnson. She’s the museum’s chief scientist (and unrelated to Kirk). “This is the record of the world,” she says.

In an age of AI, it can be difficult to tell truth from fiction. But MSC’s treasures let us see and touch and smell and study our planet’s reality. “People still want to know what is real,” Rebecca Johnson says. “This is the place where we have the real thing.”

Our private MSC tour introduced us to a colossal cache of objects. We saw items that dazzled and brought chills. We wanted to photograph everything. In a place that’s home to millions of objects, how do you pick what to feature?

We chose items with an eye to what stood out in size or peculiarity. We also focused on those with intriguing backstories. We could fill entire books with photos and the histories of these items. Instead, we’ll highlight our favorites.

This giant worm (Eulagisca gigantea, center) has true horror-movie potential. It has mouth parts that can extend out and retract in, as well as a toothed jaw. But don’t worry. These worms typically live on the sea floor. So you’ll likely never encounter a live one. This specimen is part of MSC’s wet collection — stuff preserved in fluid.

Here, Michael McGowen stands inside the massive lower jaw bones of a blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus). McGowen cares for MSC’s marine mammal specimens. The whale whose jaws he’s posing with was an adult female that once lived off the coast of Antarctica.

Weighing 2 metric tons and measuring nearly 7 meters (23 feet) long, the jaws are the largest bones in the collection. Blue whale jaws, in fact, are the largest bones of any animal ever. McGowen studies the evolution and genetics of whales and other cetaceans. He loves coming to this Whale Bone Repository — a building big enough to house airplanes. “I’m always in awe,” he says.

This bizarre-looking backbone belongs to a North Atlantic right whale (Eubalaena glacialis). Named Tips, this 14-meter (46-foot) brute appears to have survived a collision with a ship. Squiggles of bone protrude from one section of his vertebrae — a sign of injured tissue that didn’t heal cleanly.

Tips died in 2010, possibly from being caught in fishing gear. Getting tangled in gear or struck by ships are two major threats to right whales. Fewer than 400 individuals of this endangered species remain.

There are some 2 million mosquitoes in MSC’s collection. It’s the most diverse bunch of these bloodsuckers in the world.

The Uranotaenia sapphirina mosquitoes seen here may not be much of a nuisance — to humans, at least. They’re among just a handful of modern mosquito species that feed on cold-blooded creatures. Their victims include earthworms and leeches, says Yvonne-Marie Linton. She cares for MSC’s insect specimens.

In life, this pink fairy armadillo (Chlamyphorus truncatus, left) would have been a fashion designer’s dream. It boasts both a lovely pale pink shell and whitish fur. The shell gets its hue from blood vessels and may help the smallest armadillo species control its body temperature.

Check out those oversized claws, used for burrowing. They grow even bigger in the greater fairy armadillo (Calyptophractus retusus, middle). And they get bigger still in the giant armadillo (Priodontes maximus, claws shown on right).

This massive plant is part of the Smithsonian Gardens Orchid Collection. It’s one of the largest orchid species on Earth. Bulbophyllum fletcherianum has leaves that can stretch nearly 2 meters (6.5 feet). But it’s known for more than epic leafage.

Its blooms give off the foul stench of rotting flesh. That scent attracts insects, such as blow flies or carrion beetles. Those insects are looking to lay eggs in dead and decaying animals. But when the tongue orchid’s smell draws them in, they help the plant by pollinating it.

The Dracula orchid gets its name from its blood-red coloring and long, pointy structures. The plant (Dracula chimaera ‘Pacifica’) grows in Ecuador and Colombia. To fungus gnats, the orchid’s blooms have the alluring odor of mushrooms. Those flowers kind of look like mushrooms, too. Fine ribs decorate their central, pouchlike petals. This feature mimics the gills on a mushroom.

Resting in row upon row of jars, some 25 million MSC specimens sit preserved in fluid. Included among them are sand dollars, shrimp, coral, slipper lobsters and octopuses. Together, they take up roughly 72 kilometers (45 miles) of shelving. That’s more than four times as long as trails to the bottom of the Grand Canyon.

Most of these jars are filled with ethanol, nearly 2 million liters (530,000 gallons) in total. This alcohol evaporates over time. So all of the jars need to be topped off to keep their specimens from drying out.

Flesh-eating beetles might sound terrifying. But they feast on the dead, not the living. And it’s the baby beetles — or larvae — that do most of the meat-eating, anyway, explains Inger Toraason. So this hide beetle (Dermestes maculatus) on his hand poses no danger of chowing down. In fact, this insect — and thousands of its buddies — are closer to Toraason’s coworkers than specimens.

Toraason takes care of bone specimens at MSC. Flesh-eating beetles help clean animal bones for him. They eat tissue off specimens being prepped for the museum’s collections. It’s a big job. The beetles cleaned 429 skeletons in 2025 alone. They can strip a hummingbird’s bones in less than a day. A whale skull might take months.

Beetle-cleaned bones then go through several more steps to be preserved. Toraason picks off any remaining flesh by hand. Then he soaks the bones in a cleaning solution. You can see an example of this with the skeleton of a little owl (Athene noctua, inset).

If Toraason and his coworkers didn’t have beetles on their side, they could simply let flesh rot away in water. But that’s a long process. And it leaves behind just a pile of bones. With the hide beetles, the team gets an intact skeleton at the end. The beetles are “our little unsung heroes of the museum,” he says.

These vibrant ornaments were once used in headdresses by people in what is now Papua New Guinea. Made from Raggiana birds-of-paradise (Paradisaea raggiana), they’re meant to move, says Joshua Bell. At MSC, he curates cultural artifacts from around the world.

Men and sometimes women wore these ornaments while dancing in ritual performances, Bell says. Glinting light and rapid motion would have blurred the red feathers. It would appear almost as if the dancers were transforming into birds themselves.

Every year, some 4 million people walk past Henry, a towering stuffed elephant in the natural history museum in Washington, D.C. Few realize the elephant’s skull (shown) is stored at MSC.

This African bush elephant (Loxodonta africana) was roughly 4 meters tall (13 feet) and weighed 11 metric tons. He’s the largest elephant in any museum. He may have belonged to a group of “ghost” elephants in Angola that gained renown for avoiding humans.

alien: A non-native organism. (in astronomy) Life on or from a distant world.

Antarctica: A continent mostly covered in ice, which sits in the southernmost part of the world.

array: A broad and organized group of objects. Sometimes they are instruments placed in a systematic fashion to collect information in a coordinated way. Other times, an array can refer to things that are laid out or displayed in a way that can make a broad range of related things, such as colors, visible at once. The term can even apply to a range of options or choices.

Atlantic: One of the world’s five oceans, it is second in size only to the Pacific. It separates Europe and Africa to the east from North and South America to the west.

beetle: An order of insects known as Coleoptera, containing at least 350,000 different species. Adults tend to have hard and/or horn-like “forewings” which covers the wings used for flight.

birds: Warm-blooded dinosaurs with wings that first showed up at least 150 million years ago. Birds are jacketed in feathers and produce young from the eggs they deposit in some sort of nest. Most birds fly, but throughout history there have been the occasional species that don’t.

blood vessel: A tubular structure that carries blood through the tissues and organs.

blue whale: A species of baleen whale (Balaenoptera musculus) that is the largest animal ever known to have existed. They can grow to lengths of 30 meters (almost 100 feet) and weigh up to 170 metric tons.

bush: (in landscape descriptions) The name for wildlands in certain countries, especially parts of Africa and Australia.

carrion: The dead and rotting remains of an animal.

cetaceans: The order of marine mammals that includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. The baleen whales ( Mysticetes ) filter their food from the water with big baleen plates. The remaining cetaceans ( Odontoceti ) include some 70 species of toothed animals that include beluga whales, narwhals, killer whales (a type of dolphin) and porpoises.

charismatic: (n. charisma) An adjective for someone or something that has the ability to charm, fascinate or inspire great devotion.

climate: The weather conditions that typically exist in one area, in general, or over a long period.

cloud: A plume of molecules or particles, such as water droplets, that move under the action of an outside force, such as wind, radiation or water currents. (in atmospheric science) A mass of airborne water droplets and ice crystals that travel as a plume, usually high in Earth’s atmosphere. Its movement is driven by winds.

coil: Concentric rings or spirals formed by winding wire or some other fiber around and around a core; or the shape that such a wire would make.

cold-blooded: Adjective for an animal whose body temperature varies with that of its environment.

connective tissue: Certain groups of cells that attach to form the boundaries for — and interfaces between — many structures throughout the body.

coral: Marine animals that often produce a hard and stony exoskeleton and tend to live on reefs (the exoskeletons of dead ancestor corals).

curator: Someone who manages a collection of items, for instance in a museum, library or art gallery. This person’s primary job is to design exhibits, organize and acquire collections and do research on the artifacts included in the collection.

DDT: (short for dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) This toxic chemical was for a time widely used as an insect-killing agent. It proved so effective that Swiss chemist Paul Müller received the 1948 Nobel Prize (for physiology or medicine) just eight years after establishing the chemical’s incredible effectiveness in killing bugs. But many developed countries, including the United States, eventually banned its use for its poisoning of non-targeted wildlife, such as birds.

DNA: (short for deoxyribonucleic acid) A long, double-stranded and spiral-shaped molecule inside most living cells that carries genetic instructions. It is built on a backbone of phosphorus, oxygen, and carbon atoms. In all living things, from plants and animals to microbes, these instructions tell cells which molecules to make.

endangered: An adjective used to describe species at risk of going extinct.

entanglement: (in quantum physics) A concept in quantum physics that holds that subatomic particles can be linked even if they are not physically near one another. Quantum entanglement can link the properties of things at great distances — perhaps at opposite ends of the universe.

entomology: The scientific study of insects. One who does this is an entomologist. A paleoentomologist studies ancient insects, mainly through their fossils.

ethanol: A type of alcohol, also known as ethyl alcohol, that serves as the basis of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, wine and distilled spirits. It also is used as a solvent and as a fuel (often mixed with gasoline, for instance).

evolution: (v. to evolve) A process by which species undergo changes over time, usually through genetic variation and natural selection. These changes usually result in a new type of organism better suited for its environment than the earlier type. The newer type is not necessarily more “advanced,” just better adapted to the particular conditions in which it developed. Or the term can refer to changes that occur as some natural progression within the non-living world (such as computer chips evolving to smaller devices which operate at an ever faster speed).

extinction: (adj. extinct) The permanent loss of a species, family or larger group of organisms.

fiction: (adj. fictional) An idea or a story that is made-up, not a depiction of real events.

field: An area of study, as in: Her field of research is biology. Also a term to describe a real-world environment in which some research is conducted, such as at sea, in a forest, on a mountaintop or on a city street. It is the opposite of an artificial setting, such as a research laboratory.

football field: The field on which athletes play American football. Owing to its size and familiarity, many people use this field as a measure of how big something is. A regulation field (including its end zones) runs 360 feet (almost 110 meters) long and 160 feet (almost 49 meters) wide.

freeze-dried: (adj.) A term that describes a process widely used to preserve foods, drugs and other heat-sensitive products. That process relies on dissolving or suspending a substance in a liquid. Then the solvent or liquid is crystallized and then converted directly from a solid into a gas (without melting).

fungus: (plural: fungi) One of a group of single- or multiple-celled organisms that reproduce via spores and feed on living or decaying organic matter. Examples include mold, yeasts and mushrooms.

genetic: Having to do with chromosomes, DNA and the genes contained within DNA. The field of science dealing with these biological instructions is known as genetics. People who work in this field are geneticists.

geological: Adjective to describe things related to Earth’s physical structure and substance, its history and the processes that act on it. People who work in this field are known as geologists.

gills: The respiratory organ of most aquatic animals that filters oxygen out of water. Fish and other water-dwelling animals use gills to breathe.

Grand Canyon: A natural canyon in northwest Arizona that formed as the Colorado River cut through the rock here over the past 5 million to 6 million years. This is one of many canyons on the river, which drains water from seven states. The Grand Canyon is 446 kilometers (277 miles) long. Its depth varies. At its deepest point, the river is 1,829 vertical meters (6,000 feet) below the upper rim.

hue: A color or shade of some color.

insect: A type of arthropod that as an adult will have six segmented legs and three body parts: a head, thorax and abdomen. There are hundreds of thousands of insects, which include bees, beetles, flies and moths.

larvae: Immature insects that have a distinctly different form (body shape) than when they are adults. For instance, caterpillars are larval butterflies and maggots are larval flies. (Sometimes this term also is used to describe such a stage in the development of fish, frogs and other animals.)

mammal: An animal distinguished by possessing hair or fur, the secretion of milk by females for the feeding of their young, and (typically) the bearing of live young. They also are warm-blooded (or endothermic).

mandibles: (in mammals) The jaw or jawbone.

marine mammal: Any of many types of mammals that spend most of its life in the ocean environment. These include whales and dolphins, walruses and sea lions, seals and sea otters, manatees and dugongs — even polar bears.

meteorite: A lump of rock or metal from space that passes through Earth’s atmosphere and collides with the ground.

octopus: (pl. octopi or octopuses) Sea mollusks with a soft, sac-shaped body and eight arms. Two rows of suckers along each arm give the animal an ability to grasp and hold onto things. Cousins of the squids, these animals have a sharp beak-like mouth and good vision.

Pacific: The largest of the world’s five oceans. It separates Asia and Australia to the west from North and South America to the east. The term can also refer to island nations that sit within the Pacific Ocean.

pollinator: Something that carries pollen, a plant’s male reproductive cells, to the female parts of a flower, allowing fertilization. Many pollinators are insects such as bees.

population: (in biology) A group of individuals (belonging to the same species) that lives in a given area.

regulate: (n. regulation) To control with actions. Governments write rules and regulations — laws — that are enforced by police and the courts.

right whale: One of three baleen whale species in the genus Eubalaena. Each tends to live in a different ocean basin. The animals got their name from the opinion of whale hunters that these were the “right” whale to catch. Why? They swim slowly and near to shore, making them easy to find. And once dead, they’ll float so that hunters won’t lose them at sea. These whales contain lots of the oil and baleen that was sold in 18th and 19th century ports. Able to live more than 50 years (perhaps a century), these whales can grow to about 15.25 meters (50 feet) and some 63 metric tons (140,000 pounds). Those in the Northern Hemisphere were nearly wiped out by whaling. Their numbers remain low.

risk: The chance or mathematical likelihood that some bad thing might happen. For instance, exposure to radiation poses a risk of cancer. Or the hazard — or peril — itself. (For instance: Among cancer risks that the people faced were radiation and drinking water tainted with arsenic.)

sea: An ocean (or region that is part of an ocean). Unlike lakes and streams, seawater — or ocean water — is salty.

species: A group of similar organisms capable of producing offspring that can survive and reproduce.

stereotype: A widely held view or explanation for something, which often may be wrong because it has been overly simplified.

taxidermy: The reconstruction of an animal, for permanent display. Skilled people model its structure on the carcass of a real animal, sometimes incorporating parts of the original animal’s carcass, such as the bones, pelt, skin, toothed jaws or fins.

tissue: Made of cells, it is any of the distinct types of materials that make up animals, plants or fungi. Cells within a tissue work as a unit to perform a particular function in living organisms. Different organs of the human body, for instance, often are made from many different types of tissues.

vertebrae: (sing. vertebra) The bones that make up the neck, spine and tail of vertebrates. Bones in the neck are called cervical vertebrae. Bones in the tail, for animals that have them, are called caudal vertebrae.

whale: A common, but fairly imprecise, term for a class of large mammals that lives in the ocean. This group includes dolphins and porpoises.

Meghan Rosen is a staff writer who reports on the life sciences for Science News. She earned a Ph.D. in biochemistry and molecular biology with an emphasis in biotechnology from the University of California, Davis, and later graduated from the science communication program at UC Santa Cruz.