Tiêu đề: 50 Easy Summer Science Experiments for Kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/summer-science/
--------------------------------------------------

Summer is a brilliant time to explore science outdoors with children. You don’t have to set up fancy experiments, even just looking at properties of plants and leaves or testing to see if different items sink or float in a paddling pool is great, simple science for little ones.

Older children will love building bottle rockets, setting up chain reactions and making square bubbles.

I’ve compiled a fun list of our favourite summer science ideas from Science Sparks and many other fantastic blogs to keep kids of all ages happy all summer.

My DIY science camp also has some great summer science ideas, so check those out, too!

Set up an Aliens LOVE Underpants washing line to investigate how different materials absorb different amounts of water. This is a brilliant hands-on science activity for learning about the different properties of materials.

Next time you get the paddling pool out, try one of my five paddling pool experiment ideas. These include sinking and floating, making boats and learning about density!

Set up some simple ice excavations. These are super easy. Just freeze some small plastic toys in ice and ask children to rescue them using warm water or salt!

Test different materials on a small LEGO® house to learn about their properties and discover which are waterproof.

Try a fun trick for keeping a paper towel dry from Creative connections for Kids.

Make an easy barometer to learn about air pressure! This is a great science activity for observing changes over time.

Build a homemade wind vane to learn about wind strength, or follow Red Ted Art’s easy instructions for making a DIY kite.

Make a super simple rain gauge from a plastic bottle to measure rainfall. A rain gauge is another easy activity for observing changes over time.

A pinecone weather station is ALWAYS fun and a great example of super simple, inexpensive science for kids.

Find out how to tell the time with a sundial. This is another brilliant low resource science activity.

Make rainbow bubbles. Bubbles are great fun for any time of year, but there’s not much better than chasing bubbles around a sunny garden.

Bubble Snakes are fantastic fun, too! As an extra challenge, children can experiment with different materials at the end of the bottle to find out which makes the best bubbles. This activity now comes with a FREE bubble machine experiment sheet.

Did you know you can make a square bubble? You can’t really, but you can create an illusion of a slightly wonky cube with a special frame!

Last winter, we made an awesome snow volcano, but sand also works really well. If you do it in a tray, it is a great low-prep erupting volcano project.

Learn about evaporation using sand and water on a sunny day. Another visual way to learn about evaporation is using coloured water and salt.

Investigate to find what you need to make the perfect sandcastle. We experimented to find the perfect ratio of sand to water.

Set yourself up with a science lab in the garden and try a dissolving investigation.

How high can you get a bottle rocket to launch? Remember to stand back as these shoot up with a bang!

Bottle rockets are a fantastic team building STEM challenge because they require a bit of engineering. They’d also make a fantastic class or school competition.

Make straw shooters with friends. We like to set up a competition to see whose mini rocket can travel the furthest.

Building a parachute for an egg is ALWAYS a fun activity. If you’re feeling brave, use an unboiled egg!

We once had a great summer creating chain reactions with lolly sticks. They take a bit of setting up, but are most definitely worth the effort. A giant lollystick chain reaction would also make a fantastic start or finish to a science day or event.

Oobleck is a fancy name for cornflour and water. It makes a lovely sensory mixture that feels solid when squeezed in your hands and then flows like a liquid when the pressure is released.

We can’t wait to try these goop and flower cupcakes from The Imagination Tree.

Make ice cream soup with Rainy Day Mum to explore melting with a delicious reward.

A solar oven is good for making s’mores, but you’ll need a hot, sunny day and some time.

Test out filtering by cleaning up dirty water in the garden. Children can use kitchen towel, stones, charcoal or anything else they think might clean the water.

Find out how tall a tree is using a math trick. You might be surprised at how easy this is.

Learn about transpiration with white flowers, food colouring and water.

Dissect a flower to learn about the different parts. This is a very visual, hands-on way for children to learn about the structure of plants and flowers.

Find out all about Earthworms and how useful they are with a wormery.

Watch butterflies grow with Red Ted Art. I also have a delicious edible butterfly life cycle activity.

Explore the lifecycle of a ladybird with a simple fingerprint activity from Reading Confetti.

Make lovely Chromatography butterflies with Buggy and Buddy

Build a den with sticks and leaves. Do some research first. The Wildlife Trust has some great den-building tips.

Design and build a bug hotel. These can be made very simply or on a bigger scale with pallets.

Make rose petal perfume to explore mixing and scents with The Imagination Tree.

Try mixing some colour with ice made from fruit juice. At the end, you’ll have a delicious cold smoothie to drink.

Make lovely, pretty summery ice with The Imagination Tree. We like to either speed up the melting of the ice with a bit of salt or warm water, or leave cubes of ice in different places to find out where they melt the fastest.

Giant or even mini ice excavations are great for summer. We once created one so big it took ALL day to melt. One fun variation on trying to make ice melt is trying to make an ice cube last as long as possible without melting.

We’ve got enough easy summer science challenges to keep you busy ALL summer, too!

Phew, can you think of any more summer science ideas for us?

I also have a delicious round-up of 50 kitchen science experiments for a rainy day or if you need to escape the sun for a while.

Last Updated on July 4, 2025 by Emma Vanstone