Tiêu đề: Exploding black holes could solve a big cosmic mystery
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/antimatter-exploding-black-holes
--------------------------------------------------

Such black holes in the early universe may explain why matter is common and antimatter is rare

Tiny black holes (illustrated) could explain how the universe came to be mostly made of matter, while antimatter is rare.

NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center

By Emily Conover

May 21, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

DENVER, Colo. — Tiny, exploding black holes might solve a major mystery about how the universe as we know it came to be.

In the cosmos today, matter is much more common than antimatter. But scientists don’t know why. Matter makes up the stuff we can see, smell and touch. Yet antimatter — which is mostly identical to matter, just with flipped electric charges — is rarely observed. It can be released in radioactive decay or in particle collisions. But it doesn’t form solid objects.

Some physicists think that matter’s takeover of the universe may have involved tiny black holes. A black hole is a place where matter is packed so densely that nothing can escape it once it falls in, not even light.

The black holes at play here would have been born in the first instants after the Big Bang, when the universe began. If such black holes existed, they would have quickly evaporated and exploded. Those explosions would have sent out shock waves that may have set the stage for matter to take over.

Physicist Alexandra Klipfel shared this idea in March at the American Physical Society’s Global Physics Summit. She and her teammates also described the work in two papers on arXiv.org. (Studies posted to that site have not yet been vetted by other scientists.)

Scientists believe the universe began with equal amounts of matter and antimatter. But when they meet, matter and antimatter destroy one another. Without something to tip the balance in matter’s favor, the universe would have been boring — and empty.

Tiny black holes could have shifted the balance to produce our matter-rich cosmos, Klipfel’s team says. That could have allowed stars, planets and galaxies to form.

Usually, black holes form when a star dies and collapses. But these black holes would have formed differently. They would have collapsed from fluctuations in the density of energy in the early universe. Each one would typically have had only about as much mass as a small car.

The black holes would have spewed out particles called Hawking radiation. As a result, the black holes would steadily lose mass and eventually explode. All this would have happened within the first tenth of a billionth of a second of the universe’s existence.

Such explosions would have launched out traveling walls of energy called shock waves. Each explosion and shock wave would have heated a black hole’s surroundings. “It’s a really sharp wall,” Klipfel says, with different conditions inside and outside the shock. A wall like that would provide the right conditions to create an excess of matter.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

Early in the universe, there may have been processes that converted antimatter into matter. But in a universe where everything is smoothly spread out, any process that could do that would work both ways at once. That should keep matter and antimatter in equal amounts.

With the sharp wall of a shock wave, conditions on one side would differ drastically from those on the other. That could give matter a boost.

Inside a thin shell behind a shock wave, temperatures would be extremely high. So high that, weirdly, particles would not have mass.

Outside the shock wave, particles would have mass — and inside they wouldn’t. When particles crossed the border, their mass would change. This could be happening at the same time as other weird physics that might have been at work in the early universe. Together, those effects could have caused more and more matter to build up at the boundary of a shock wave. And that extra matter could have then been locked in as the shock expanded.

Matter and antimatter still would have destroyed one another, but the extra matter means that some would have been left over at the end. And that’s what would make up everything we see around us.

For tiny black holes to be responsible for matter’s victory, many, many of them would have had to explode moments after the Big Bang. Instead of being a finale, those fireworks could have been just the beginning.

antimatter: Molecules formed by atoms consisting of antiprotons, antineutrons, and positrons.

Big Bang: The rapid expansion of dense matter and space-time that, according to current theory, marked the origin of the universe. It is supported by astronomers’ current understanding of the composition and structure of the universe.

black hole: A region of space having a gravitational field so intense that no matter or radiation (including light) can escape.

cosmos: (adj. cosmic) A term that refers to the universe and everything within it.

density: The measure of how condensed some object is, found by dividing its mass by its volume.

Hawking radiation: The particles emitted from the event horizon on the outer edges of a black hole. Energy can be converted into a pair of particles. If that happens very close to outer edge of a black hole, one of those particles can tunnel out and become detected — providing the only direct physical clue to the black hole’s presence. These emissions are called Hawking radiation for Stephen Hawking, the famous British physicist who came up with the idea that black holes can emit particles.

mass: A number that shows how much an object resists speeding up or slowing down — basically a measure of how much matter that object is made from.

matter: Something that occupies space and has mass. Anything on Earth with matter will have a property described as "weight."

particle: A minute amount of something.

phenomenon: Something that is surprising or unusual.

physics: The scientific study of the nature and properties of matter and energy. Classical physics is an explanation of the nature and properties of matter and energy that relies on descriptions such as Newton’s laws of motion. Quantum physics, a field of study that emerged later, is a more accurate way of explaining the tiny motions and behavior of matter about the size of electrons. A scientist who works in such areas is known as a physicist.

planet: A large celestial object that orbits a star but unlike a star does not generate any visible light.

radiation: (in physics) One of the three major ways that energy is transferred. (The other two are conduction and convection.) In radiation, electromagnetic waves carry energy from one place to another. Unlike conduction and convection, which need material to help transfer the energy, radiation can transfer energy across empty space.

radioactive decay: A process by which an element is converted into a lighter element through the shedding of subatomic particles (and energy).

shock waves: Tiny regions in a gas or fluid where properties of the host material change dramatically owing to the passage of some object (which could be a plane in air or merely bubbles in water). Across a shock wave, a region’s pressure, temperature and density spike briefly, and almost instantaneously.

star: The basic building block from which galaxies are made. Stars develop when gravity compacts clouds of gas. When they become hot enough, stars will emit light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation. The sun is our closest star.

summit: (in public policy) A meeting between officials of some organization or governments, often with the goal of negotiating new rules, policies or treaties.

universe: The entire cosmos: All things that exist throughout space and time. It has been expanding since its formation during an event known as the Big Bang, some 13.8 billion years ago (give or take a few hundred million years).

Preprint: A.P. Klipfel et al. Baryogenesis from exploding primordial black holes. arXiv. Submitted March 30, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.29024.

Meeting: A. Klipfel. Baryogenesis from exploding primordial black holes. Global Physics Summit. March 18, 2026. Denver, Colo.

Preprint: M. Vanvlasselaer et al. Shocks from exploding primordial black holes in the early universe. arXiv. Submitted on March 16, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.15746.

Science News physics writer Emily Conover studied physics at the University of Chicago. She loves physics for its ability to reveal the secret rules about how stuff works, from tiny atoms to the vast cosmos.

Readability Score: 7.2

HS-ESS1-2, MS-ESS1-3