Tiêu đề: The Okefenokee’s dark waters hold secrets about climate and more
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/okefenokee-swamp-ecology-climate
--------------------------------------------------

This peat swamp in southeast Georgia teems with biodiversity — and huge stores of carbon

Spending time in the Okefenokee is like traveling back in time. “It’s very mysterious,” says river advocate Rena Peck. “All of a sudden you hear sandhill cranes. They sound like the pterodactyls from Jurassic Park. … It’s exhilarating.”

shutterjack/RooM/Getty Images

By Avery Elizabeth Hurt

March 12, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

Readability Score: 6.5

HS-LS2-3, MS-LS2-3

It’s quiet in the Okefenokee. Cypress trees, draped with Spanish moss, loom over the dark water of this swamp in southeastern Georgia. But look closely and that stillness reveals signs of life — and hints of hope in the midst of global change.

A black bear wanders the edge of the swamp looking for berries. A water moccasin’s serpentine body dangles from a branch overhanging the water. An alligator sunning on a log slips into the water as a boat approaches. A great blue heron swoops overhead while, beneath the surface, a black-banded darter flips its fins and glides silently away.

At night, animals join in a multi-species chorus. The swamp rings with the trills and buzzes of tree frogs and the bass croak of bullfrogs. Nearby, a barred owl calls. Suddenly, something shrieks in the dark. You can’t see it. But who could mistake the otherworldly cry of a bobcat? This is life in the Okefenokee. And there’s an abundance of it.

Part land, part water, the Okefenokee Swamp formed thousands of years ago. Its area was once covered by the ocean. Then the seas receded. This left a ridge, with the sea on one side and a shallow freshwater ecosystem on the other. That freshwater became the Okefenokee. Today, this swamp is thriving. And what’s hidden beneath its dark waters may be crucial for saving life elsewhere — if the swamp can survive the threats it faces.

The surface here is more water than ground. And that small amount of ground can be wet and wobbly. That’s how the swamp got its name. Okefenokee is a Muscogee word. It means “land of trembling earth.” (The Muscogee are an Indigenous people from this area.)

If you paddle through the Okefenokee, you’ll notice that its water is black and shiny. It reflects an upside-down version of the swamp, as if it’s looking at itself in a mirror. The water is black because the Okefenokee is a unique type of ecosystem: a peatland swamp.

Peat is a thick layer of partly decomposed plants. And that peat does more than stain the water.

As they grow, plants absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Carbon from the gas will be used to make plant tissues. Later, when these plants die and break down, that carbon will be released back into the air. At least that’s how it usually works.

But the Okefenokee has a lot of slow-moving water below the surface of its soil. Still waters hold less dissolved oxygen than flowing water. Less oxygen supports fewer of the bacteria that break down plants and other organic matter. So when plants in the Okefenokee die, they build up into thick layers of peat.

This peat stores the plants’ carbon rather than releasing it into the atmosphere. Places where carbon is stored, or sequestered, in this way are called carbon “sinks.”

And the Okefenokee is a huge carbon sink. There’s an estimated 124 million metric tons of carbon tucked away here. That’s roughly as much as 27 million gas-burning cars would release in a year.

Keeping carbon out of the atmosphere helps limit global warming. When it comes to protecting the climate, the Okefenokee “punches above its weight,” says Kemen Austin. Austin is director of science at the Nature Conservancy in Arlington, Va.

She was part of a team that studied carbon in peatlands. Earth’s peatlands store more carbon than all of the planet’s forests combined. Austin’s team reported this in the January/February 2025 Conservation Letters.

The Okefenokee’s peat stores more than just carbon, adds biologist Sara Aicher. She recently retired from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, where she spent her career studying this swamp.

Its peat layers also record what the past climate and vegetation were like. By reading these layers, researchers can learn how conditions have changed over the past 7,500 years and how the swamp responded. Over time, Aicher says, areas that once were open marsh turned shrubby. Some filled in with forest. Charcoal layers in the peat point to when fire shaped this habitat.

All that peat also acts like a giant sponge. It quickly soaks up rain water. Then, during dry spells, it releases moisture slowly. Regulating water like this reduces the harms of both floods and droughts.

By studying its peat, scientists are learning what makes this swamp habitat resilient — and how it responds to danger. It also offers clues about how other parts of the planet may react to changing conditions such as increased heat, floods and droughts.

The Okefenokee has faced many threats throughout its history. In 1891, the Suwannee Canal Company bought the land, hoping to cut trees for timber. The company tried to drain the swamp — but digging proved difficult and costly. The Suwannee Canal Company went bankrupt. Other companies soon built railroads through the swamp. That made it easier to harvest cypress trees.

But many people who cared about the swamp formed groups that tried to save it.

In 1918, for instance, local residents formed the Okefenokee Society. It asked the U.S. government to buy some of the property for a nature preserve. That effort did not succeed and lasted only a few years. Then, in 1929, the Georgia Society of Naturalists began working to protect the swamp. Other organizations and citizens joined the cause. Together, their work paid off.

In 1937, the U.S. government purchased the land. Then-president Franklin Roosevelt designated the area a National Wildlife Refuge. There would be no more logging, no more attempts to drain the swamp. Today, the refuge spreads over 164,565 hectares (635 square miles) of land in southeastern Georgia. That’s more than twice the land area of New York City.

Still, the Okefenokee is not completely safe. Activities outside the refuge can harm the protected area.

For instance, in 2019, a mining company announced plans to dig a titanium mine on a huge sand dune that borders the swamp. Called Trail Ridge, the dune is left over from when the ocean retreated thousands of years ago. It acts as a natural dam that keeps water inside the Okefenokee’s shallow basin.

There are other titanium mines on Trail Ridge. But this one would be very close to the swamp. Scientists worried the mine could pull groundwater out of the swamp, explains Ashby Worley. She works at the Nature Conservancy in Brunswick, Ga. There, she specializes in coastal climate adaptation. Water is key to swamp ecosystems, she notes. It also helps moderate fires.

And losing water won’t just affect a swamp itself. Dropping water levels could expose some of its peat, Aicher explains. Exposed to air, peat starts to break down. Suddenly, all its stored carbon would get released into the air.

Or as Rena Peck puts it: “That carbon sink would become a carbon bomb.” An ecologist, Peck is executive director of Georgia Rivers. This organization works to protect these waters.

Peat has been building up in the Okefenokee for thousands of years, Peck explains. “It’s up to 15 feet [4.6 meters] deep at its deepest point. It takes 50 years to build just one inch [2.5 centimeters] of it. So just think, if it was wiped away, how long it would take to get back.” If you do the math, that’s 9,000 years. So if mining came too close to the swamp, some 9,000 years of carbon-storing peat could be destroyed in just a few years.

Fortunately, the Okefenokee was saved again. A group called the Conservation Fund stepped in. It bought the land on Trail Ridge to keep it from being mined. But the threat is not totally gone. Some areas of Trail Ridge are still vulnerable. Conservation groups are keeping an eye on these, says Worley. “We’re trying to figure out what our next step is on how to protect the rest of Trail Ridge.”

In January 2025, after getting input from the public, government officials, tribal leaders and environmental groups, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service expanded the protected area; it added 22,000 acres to the refuge.

Jon Ossoff is a Georgia senator. He has worked to further expand the protected area to give more buffer to Trail Ridge. Last May, he also got the U.S. government to promise it would never sell the Okefenokee.

Mining poses the most urgent threat to the swamp, but it’s not the only one. The swamp’s gators hold secrets about another.

The American alligator is probably the swamp’s most famous resident. Around 15,000 call the Okefenokee home.

Kristen Zemaitis is an ecologist and reptile expert. She studied the swamp’s gators when she was at the University of Georgia’s School of Ecology in Athens. (Zemaitis now works with the Caretta Research Project, an organization that studies and protects sea turtles.)

For her research, Zemaitis analyzed blood from more than 100 alligators. She was looking for mercury. This metal is toxic to nerve tissue. Mercury poisoning can cause muscle weakness and difficulty walking and moving. In people, it can lead to trouble seeing, hearing or speaking.

Other researchers had found high mercury levels in small animals in the swamp. But no one had looked for mercury in alligators.

What Zemaitis and her team found disturbed them. Okefenokee alligators had mercury levels eight times as high as alligators at other sites. The scientists shared their findings in the June 2025 Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry. Adult gators top the swamp’s food web. High mercury levels in alligators show that the poison can accumulate as these animals eat mercury-tainted prey.

“The biggest question now is what else is being affected,” says Zemaitis. Other swamp dwellers are likely at risk, too. And mercury’s effects could reach well beyond the swamp. Many migratory birds winter in the Okefenokee. Birds are very sensitive to mercury poisoning, Zemaitis says. They could die or spread the poison to other ecosystems when they leave in the spring. Mercury could even endanger people who fish or hunt in the area.

The Okefenokee is precious not only to the United States. It’s recognized as a Wetland of International Importance. This designation comes from the Ramsar Convention, an international agreement to conserve wetlands around the globe.

The Okefenokee may get even more protection and recognition. Based on its biodiversity and peatlands, it’s been nominated to become a World Heritage Site. These special sites are protected so future generations can enjoy them. The Great Barrier Reef, Galapagos Islands and Grand Canyon are among other natural World Heritage Sites.

These designations could help people who live near the swamp, too. Kim Bednarek is executive director of Okefenokee Swamp Park. Her organization manages tourism there. Being a World Heritage Site will bring more visitors, Bednarek says. Tourism can boost the income of nearby communities. And, she notes, those towns are some of the poorest in Georgia.

As a World Heritage Site and wildlife refuge, the Okefenokee will be protected to ensure that tourism doesn’t harm the swamp, which could be good for the ecosystem and its human neighbors.

Visiting the Okefenokee is kind of like going back in time. A 190-kilometer (118-mile) “canoe trail” winds through its waters. If you paddle this trail, you might feel a bit of what Native Americans felt, says Peck. “You’re doing what people have done for thousands of years.”

Just being in the Okefenokee, Peck says, is a like a memory of primeval existence. “It’s very mysterious,” she says. “All of a sudden you hear sandhill cranes. They sound like the pterodactyls from Jurassic Park. You see an alligator pop up. You hear the birds and the bugs and the bubbling up of the gases trapped under the peat. You hear the wind through the marsh reeds. It’s exhilarating.”

Scientists still have much to learn about this amazing swamp and its value to our planet. The Okefenokee hasn’t yet revealed all its secrets.

Today, the Okefenokee is home to a diverse range of animals and plants. But in the past, it was home to people too.

During the Civil War, enslaved people sometimes escaped from nearby communities and hid in the swamp. Deserters from the Confederate Army hid there, too. Later, a few white families moved in. These families hunted, fished and raised livestock.

However, Indigenous people lived in the Okefenokee for thousands of years before that. Its land was the homeland of the Muscogee Nation (white people called them Creeks).

The Muscogee Nation’s homelands spread over what is now Alabama and Georgia. Some of the land was lost in treaties with Spain and Great Britain in the 1700s. But they retained the Okefenokee, which they held sacred. “We held on to this part of the land as long as we could,” says RaeLynn Butler. She’s secretary of culture and humanities for the Muscogee Nation.

A white, 18th-century naturalist who explored the southeast, William Bartram, encountered the Muscogee in his travels. They considered the Okefenokee “a most blissful spot of the Earth,” he wrote in a 1791 book.

However, the Muscogee lost the Okefenokee in 1814. Andrew Jackson brought U.S. troops to fight the Muscogee. He defeated them at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in Alabama. “As a result of that, we had to cede over 23 million acres of land in Alabama and southern Georgia,” Butler explains. That’s an area a bit bigger than the state of Maine. “The Okefenokee was a part of that.”

After the defeat, things got worse for the Muscogee. In the 1830s, the U.S. government forced them to move to Oklahoma.

“It’s almost 200 years since we’ve been removed,” says Butler. But then the Muscogee heard that the proposed mine put their homeland at risk. A delegation of them traveled back to aid efforts in supporting the swamp, she says. “We’ve been keeping an eye on it ever since.”

adaptation: (in biology) The development of new programs, processes, policies and structures to make communities and their inhabitants better able to head off — or at least withstand — the dangerous impacts of a warming climate. Those impacts may include drought, flooding, wildfires, extreme heat and extreme storms.

atmosphere: The envelope of gases surrounding Earth, another planet or a moon.

bacteria: (singular: bacterium) Single-celled organisms. These dwell nearly everywhere on Earth, from the bottom of the sea to inside other living organisms (such as plants and animals). Bacteria are one of the three domains of life on Earth.

basin: (in geology) A low-lying area, often below sea level. It collects water, which then deposits fine silt and other sediment on its bottom. Because it collects these materials, it’s sometimes referred to as a catchment or a drainage basin.

biodiversity: (short for biological diversity) The number and variety of species found within a localized geographic region.

biologist: A scientist involved in the study of living things.

Britain: A shortened form for Great Britain, which is the collective name for England, Scotland, Wales and their associated islands. It also can refer just to England and Wales, the territories conquered by the ancient Romans who named the land Britannia.

bug: One of many species of small insects with mouthparts that evolved an ability to pierce and suck liquids from a plant. Also a slang term for any insect. Sometimes it’s even used to refer to a germ.

carbon: A chemical element that is the physical basis of all life on Earth. (in climate studies) The term carbon sometimes will be used almost interchangeably with carbon dioxide to connote the potential impacts that some action, product, policy or process may have on long-term atmospheric warming.

carbon dioxide: (or CO2) A colorless, odorless gas produced by all animals when the oxygen they inhale reacts with the carbon-rich foods that they’ve eaten. Carbon dioxide also is released when organic matter burns (including fossil fuels like oil or gas). Carbon dioxide acts as a greenhouse gas, trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere. Plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen during photosynthesis, the process they use to make their own food.

civil war: A war fought between two or more opposing groups that are citizens of the same country. In the U.S. Civil War, which took place from 1861 to 1865, southern “Confederate” states that had supported slavery fought unsuccessfully to break from the United States and form a new country.

climate: The weather conditions that typically exist in one area, in general, or over a long period.

conservation: (v. conserve) The act of preserving or protecting something. The focus of this work can range from art objects to endangered species and other aspects of the natural environment.

culture: (n. in social science) The sum total of typical behaviors and social practices of a related group of people (such as a tribe or nation). Their culture includes their beliefs, values and the symbols that they accept and/or use. Culture is passed on from generation to generation through learning. Scientists once thought culture to be exclusive to humans. Now they recognize some other animals show signs of culture as well, including dolphins and primates.

drought: An extended period of abnormally low rainfall; a shortage of water resulting from this.

ecology:  A branch of biology that deals with the relations of organisms to one another and to their physical surroundings. A scientist who works in this field is called an ecologist.

ecosystem: A group of interacting living organisms — including microorganisms, plants and animals — and their physical environment within a particular climate. Examples include tropical reefs, rainforests, alpine meadows and polar tundra. The term can also be applied to elements that make up some artificial environment, such as a company, classroom or the internet.

food web: (also known as a food chain) The network of relationships among organisms sharing an ecosystem. Member organisms depend on others within this network as a source of food.

freshwater: A noun or adjective that describes bodies of water with very low concentrations of salt. It’s the type of water used for drinking and making up most inland lakes, ponds, rivers and streams, as well as groundwater.

generation: A group of individuals (in any species) born at about the same time or that are regarded as a single group. Your parents belong to one generation of your family, for example, and your grandparents to another. Similarly, you and everyone within a few years of your age across the planet are referred to as belonging to a particular generation of humans.

global warming: The gradual increase in the overall temperature of Earth’s atmosphere due to the greenhouse effect. This effect is caused by increased levels of carbon dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons and other gases in the air, many of them released by human activity.

Grand Canyon: A natural canyon in northwest Arizona that formed as the Colorado River cut through the rock here over the past 5 million to 6 million years. This is one of many canyons on the river, which drains water from seven states. The Grand Canyon is 446 kilometers (277 miles) long. Its depth varies. At its deepest point, the river is 1,829 vertical meters (6,000 feet) below the upper rim. From rim to rim, the canyon’s width also varies — from about 16 kilometers (10 miles) to 29 kilometers. Of this impressive national land formation, more than a million acres (4,931 square kilometers, to be exact) was turned into a U.S. national park in 1919.

Great Barrier Reef: Some 2,300 kilometers (1,430 miles) long, this natural coral habitat is the largest living structure on Earth. In coastal waters off of northeastern Australia, It’s big enough to see from space. It’s home to some 3,000 coral reefs, 600 islands, and hundreds of types of 600 types corals, more jellyfish, mollusks, worms and fish. It’s also patrolled by more than 30 species of whales and dolphins.

groundwater: Water that is held underground in the soil or in pores and crevices in rock.

habitat: The area or natural environment in which an animal or plant normally lives, such as a desert, coral reef or freshwater lake. A habitat can be home to thousands of different species.

indigenous: Native to some region. (in anthropology) An adjective (and capitalized) for people that have lived for eons in some region, developing a culture that reflects the resources, climate and ecosystems of that place.

Jurassic: Lasting from about 200 million to 145.5 million years ago, it’s the middle period of the Mesozoic Era. This was a time when dinosaurs were the dominant form of life on land.

livestock: Animals raised for meat or dairy products, including cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens and geese. In some cases, farmed insects are referred to as mini-livestock.

log: (v.) The process of cutting down trees to get lumber.

marsh: A low-lying wetland usually covered with grasses and shrubs, not trees. It’s a prime feeding and nesting ground for waterfowl.

mercury: Sometimes called quicksilver, mercury is an element with the atomic number 80. At room temperature, this silvery metal is a liquid. Mercury is also very toxic.

metal: Something that conducts electricity well, tends to be shiny (reflective) and is malleable (meaning it can be reshaped with heat and not too much force or pressure).

migratory: An adjective for species that travel long distances each year, along fairly regular paths, to find food or more hospitable conditions (such as better weather). Such travels are known as migrations.

moisture: Small amounts of water present in the air, as vapor. It can also be present as a liquid, such as water droplets condensed on the inside of a window, or dampness present in clothing or soil.

moss: A small, flowerless green plant that lacks true roots. It tends to grow as carpets or rounded cushions in damp habitats. It can reproduce asexually, through fragmentation, or by means of spores released from stalked capsules.

muscle: A type of tissue used to produce movement by contracting its cells, known as muscle fibers. Muscle is rich in protein, which is why predatory species seek prey containing lots of this tissue.

Native Americans: Tribal peoples that settled North America. In the United States, they are also known as American Indians. In Canada they tend to be referred to as First Nations.

naturalist: A biologist who works in the field (such as in forests, swamps or tundra) and studies the interconnections between wildlife that make up local ecosystems.

nerve: A long, delicate fiber that transmits signals across the body of an animal. An animal’s backbone contains many nerves, some of which control the movement of its legs or fins, and some of which convey sensations such as hot, cold or pain.

organic: (in chemistry) An adjective that indicates something is carbon-containing; also a term that relates to the basic chemicals that make up living organisms. (in agriculture) Farm products grown without the use of non-natural and potentially toxic chemicals, such as pesticides.

oxygen: A gas that makes up about 21 percent of Earth's atmosphere. All animals and many microorganisms need oxygen to fuel their growth (and metabolism).

peat: Largely decomposed plant material that develops in the absence of oxygen within a water-saturated site, such as a bog. When dried out, peat can be burned as a low-grade fuel.

range: The full extent or distribution of something. For instance, a plant or animal’s range is the area over which it naturally exists.

refuge: Some place that provides safety, such as protection from danger, discomfort or pursuit. For instance, a cave could provide refuge from the storm.

reptile: Vertebrate animals belonging to a group known as Reptilia. Most reptiles have skin that is covered with scales or horny plates. Snakes, turtles, lizards and alligators are all reptiles. Once considered their own separate group, birds now belong to this order. With the exception of modern birds, most reptiles are cold-blooded (or ectothermic).

resident: Some member of a community of organisms that lives in a particular place. (Antonym: visitor)

resilient: (n. resilience) To be able to recover fairly quickly from obstacles or difficult conditions. (in materials) The ability of something to spring back or recover to its original shape after bending or otherwise contorting the material.

risk: The chance or mathematical likelihood that some bad thing might happen. For instance, exposure to radiation poses a risk of cancer. Or the hazard — or peril — itself. (For instance: Among cancer risks that the people faced were radiation and drinking water tainted with arsenic.)

sea: An ocean (or region that is part of an ocean). Unlike lakes and streams, seawater — or ocean water — is salty.

serpentine: Relating to serpents or snakes.

sink: (in biology) Some part of an ecosystem or the environment that serves as a storage depot for some chemical. For instance, trees or the soil can become a sink for the carbon released into the atmosphere.

society: An integrated group of people or animals that generally cooperate and support one another for the greater good of them all.

sponge: Something that sops up liquids or other materials and holds them until squeezed out or removed in some other way. (in biology) A primitive aquatic animal with a soft, porous body.

timber: Trees grown as a source of wood for human needs.

tissue: Made of cells, it is any of the distinct types of materials that make up animals, plants or fungi. Cells within a tissue work as a unit to perform a particular function in living organisms. Different organs of the human body, for instance, often are made from many different types of tissues.

toxic: Poisonous or able to harm or kill cells, tissues or whole organisms. The measure of risk posed by such a poison is its toxicity.

trill: A fluttering but fast song, usually oscillating between two or more notes.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: A research agency of the U.S. Department of the Interior, it was created in 1871 as the U.S. Commission on Fish and Fisheries. Fourteen years later, it acquired an office of ornithology (the science of birds). In 1905 it was renamed the Bureau of Biological Survey. It now has authority for research on and the conservation of land-based species, of freshwater species and of migratory birds.

unique: Something that is unlike anything else; the only one of its kind.

vegetation: Leafy, green plants. The term refers to the collective community of plants in some area. Typically these do not include tall trees, but instead plants that are shrub height or shorter.

wetland: As the name implies, this is a low-lying area of land either soaked or covered with water much of the year. It hosts plants and animals adapted to live in, on or near water.

A version of this article appears in the June 1, 2026 issue of Science News Explores.

Journal: K.J. Zemaitis et al. Site-specific ontogenetic drivers of mercury concentrations in American alligators. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry. Vol. 44, June 2025, p. 1611. doi: 10.1093/etojnl/vgaf060.

Journal: Ü. Mander, M. Opik and M. Espenberg. Global peatland greenhouse gas dynamics: state of the art, processes, and perspectives. New Phytologist. Vol. 246, April 2025, p. 94. doi: 10.1111/nph.20436.

Journal: K.G. Austin et al. Mismatch between global importance of peatlands and the extent of their protection. Conservation Letters. Vol. 18, January/February 2025, e13080. doi: 10.1111/conl.13080.

Report: Nomination to the World Heritage List by the United States of America 2025. Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge: Water and Fire in the Land of the Trembling Earth, 2025.

Book: G.W. Folkerts. Okefenokee. Jackson, Miss: University of Mississippi Press, 2002, 166 pp.

Avery Elizabeth Hurt is a science journalist and author who hasn’t yet met a field of science that doesn’t fascinate her.