Tiêu đề: Do multiple universes exist?
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/multiverse-multiple-universes-space
--------------------------------------------------

Some branches of physics suggest we may live in a multiverse

In the 2022 film Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, Doctor Strange traveled across the multiverse and even fought one of his doppelgängers. In the real world, hopping between such islands of existence would be no easy feat.

CAPITAL PICTURES/ALAMY

By Maria Temming

April 27, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

The Marvel Cinematic Universe really should be called the Marvel Cinematic Multiverse. In the films, alternate realities can be created and destroyed. Characters can also hop between them. This has allowed heroes like Spider-Man and Loki to team up with various versions of themselves. The Scarlet Witch and Doctor Strange can even possess the bodies of their interdimensional doppelgängers.

Superhero screenwriters aren’t the only ones intrigued by the idea of a multiverse. Some physicists think it’s possible that a multiverse might really exist. Why? Because the existence of many other universes could answer deep questions about our own.

“There are a lot of abstract ideas about other universes,” says Paul Halpern. He’s a physicist at Saint Joseph’s University in Philadelphia, Pa. One popular multiverse idea, he says, comes from the physics of the very biggest things: cosmology. Another comes from the physics of the very smallest stuff. That’s quantum mechanics.

Shortly after the Big Bang, our universe went through a brief period of superfast expansion. Scientists call this growth spurt inflation. In that time, tiny quantum fluctuations in the structure of the universe got stretched to huge sizes. In parts of space close enough for our telescopes to see, those quantum blips seeded galaxies.

“If you can produce a galaxy from quantum fluctuations, what else can you produce?” wonders Andrei Linde. This physicist was involved in creating the theory of inflation. He’s now retired from Stanford University in California.

At even larger scales, Linde says, quantum blips could have seeded regions of space with vastly different properties. Such places would exist far beyond what telescopes can see. In some of them, electrons might be much heavier, Linde says. Or gravity might behave differently. There, life might not be able to exist.

What’s more, inflation has stopped in the universe we can see. But it may continue elsewhere, Linde says. It could blow up more bubbles of space with unique properties forever. Each bubble would be so distant and distinct from the others that they would effectively be different universes.

To Linde and some other scientists, this scenario answers a big question in cosmology. That is: why the masses of particles and strengths of forces in our universe seem perfectly right to create life.

At a glance, this looks like “many strange coincidences,” Linde says. But in mystery novels, “there’s always the detective who says, ‘I do not believe in coincidences.’”

Linde doesn’t, either. If a multiverse exists, he says, then it’s not so strange that conditions in our universe are ripe for life. Among many bubble universes, those particle masses and force strengths were bound to pop up somewhere.

If our universe is one bubble in a fathomless froth, maybe another universe has bumped into ours, Halpern says. That could have left a mark on the afterglow of the Big Bang that fills space. “No one has seen yet the rings that would represent the scars of bubble collisions,” Halpern says. “But scientists are still looking.”

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

Another multiverse idea comes from quantum mechanics. That branch of physics says that until they’re measured, particles can exist in a mix of multiple states at once.

“Once somebody takes a measurement, that blurred scenario collapses into a single possibility,” Halpern says. For instance, an electron that existed in a smear of possible places is observed in just one spot.

At least, that is the traditional idea in quantum mechanics. But it “is a little bit odd, because it requires a human measurer,” Halpern says. If it’s true, how did the universe function before humans were around to observe it?

In 1957, physicist Hugh Everett III offered an explanation. Maybe, he proposed, observation doesn’t cause a spread of quantum possibilities to collapse into a single outcome. Perhaps all possibilities unfold in alternate realities. For instance, an observer splits into multiple copies of herself who each saw an electron in different places.

“The versions separate seamlessly,” Halpern says. “They never will know about each other and they live in parallel universes.”

Unfortunately, that would make this idea extremely hard to test. “We can’t have somebody split in an experiment between two possibilities and ask each one what it was like,” Halpern says. “If the theory is right, you wouldn’t notice it.”

The chances of visiting other universes, if they exist, are similarly dim.

In theory, tunnels in the fabric of spacetime — known as wormholes — might bridge realities. But “we don’t know if they’re possible to create,” says Halpern. If they were, “they would require so much energy and mass that they would be well beyond current technology.”

We’re talking about the mass of a galaxy, Halpern adds. “If there was [a wormhole] near Earth, Earth would be crushed almost immediately,” he says. “So it’s not like you can have a wormhole in a secret closet in your bedroom and every night open up the closet door and jump in and travel to all these other places. Your parents might be a little upset when the bedroom starts to collapse into nothingness.”

That may be bad news for anyone who dreams of teaming up with their alter egos to save the day. But on the bright side, you’ll probably never have to fight off your evil twin, either.

Another weird multiverse idea is that the 3-D space of our universe exists within a larger, 4-D space. There, our 3-D universe would be stacked up alongside other 3-D universes like slices in a 4-D loaf of bread. In this setup, it might even be possible for people who live in one 3-D slice to jump into another, says Andrei Linde. But the reality-breaking physics needed for that would surely be a “complicated procedure,” he says.

abstract: Something that exists as an idea or thought but not concrete or tangible (touchable) in the real world. Beauty, love and memory are abstractions; cars, trees and water are concrete and tangible.

Big Bang: The rapid expansion of dense matter and space-time that, according to current theory, marked the origin of the universe. It is supported by astronomers’ current understanding of the composition and structure of the universe.

cosmic: An adjective that refers to the cosmos — the universe and everything within it.

cosmology: The science of the origin and development of the cosmos, or universe. People who work in this field are known as cosmologists.

doppelgänger: A German term for someone that has a spiritual double, or counterpart. It’s not a ghost, because these exist for living individuals. The English language has borrowed the term to refer to someone’s “double” — a person who visually resembles them so well that they easily could be mistaken for them.

electron: A negatively charged particle, usually found orbiting the outer regions of an atom; also, the carrier of electricity within solids.

fabric: Any flexible material that is woven, knitted or can be fused into a sheet by heat or compression and drying.

fluctuation: (v. fluctuate) Some type of change in a pattern or signal that varies at irregular intervals and often by amounts that are hard to predict.

force: Some outside influence that can change the motion of an object, hold objects close to one another, or produce motion or stress in a stationary object.

galaxy: A group of stars — and usually invisible, mysterious dark matter — all held together by gravity. Giant galaxies, such as the Milky Way, often have more than 100 billion stars. The dimmest galaxies may have just a few thousand. Some galaxies also have gas and dust from which they make new stars.

gravity: The force that attracts anything with mass, or bulk, toward any other thing with mass. The more mass that something has, the greater its gravity.

mass: A number that shows how much an object resists speeding up and slowing down — basically a measure of how much matter that object is made from.

media: A term for the ways information is delivered and shared within a society. It encompasses not only the traditional media — newspapers, magazines, radio and television — but also digital outlets, such as Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, TikTok and WhatsApp. The newer, digital media are sometimes referred to as social media. The singular form of this term is medium.

multiverse: A term to connote the idea that our universe may be one of many (perhaps an infinite number of alternative universes) and that different things may happen in each.

novel: Something that is clever or unusual and new, as in never seen before.

parallel: An adjective that describes two things that are side by side and have the same distance between their parts. In the word “all,” the final two letters are parallel lines. Or two things, events or processes that have much in common if compared side by side.

particle: A minute amount of something.

physics: The scientific study of the nature and properties of matter and energy. Classical physics is an explanation of the nature and properties of matter and energy that relies on descriptions such as Newton’s laws of motion. Quantum physics, a field of study that emerged later, is a more accurate way of explaining the motions and behavior of matter. A scientist who works in such areas is known as a physicist.

quantum mechanics: A branch of physics dealing with the behavior of matter on the scale of atoms or subatomic particles.

scenario: A possible (or likely) sequence of events and how they might play out.

spacetime: A term made essential by Einstein’s theory of relativity, it describes a designation for some spot given in terms of its three-dimensional coordinates in space, along with a fourth coordinate corresponding to time.

superposition: (in quantum physics) The ability of some minute subatomic-scale particle to be more than one place at the same time. It has to do with particles in the quantum world having the weird capacity to exist in all possible states (or positions) at once.

telescope: Usually a light-collecting instrument that makes distant objects appear nearer through the use of lenses or a combination of curved mirrors and lenses. Some, however, collect radio emissions (energy from a different portion of the electromagnetic spectrum) through a network of antennas.

theory: (in science) A description of some aspect of the natural world based on extensive observations, tests and reason. A theory can also be a way of organizing a broad body of knowledge that applies in a broad range of circumstances to explain what will happen. Unlike the common definition of theory, a theory in science is not just a hunch. Ideas or conclusions that are based on a theory — and not yet on firm data or observations — are referred to as theoretical. Scientists who use mathematics and/or existing data to project what might happen in new situations are known as theorists.

unique: Something that is unlike anything else; the only one of its kind.

universe: The entire cosmos: All things that exist throughout space and time. It has been expanding since its formation during an event known as the Big Bang, some 13.8 billion years ago (give or take a few hundred million years).

wormhole: (in physics) A tunnel or bridge formed by the warping of spacetime that would allow objects to take a shortcut path between two distant places in space and time. Although none has yet been witnessed, Einstein’s theory of general relativity predicted that they could exist.

A version of this article appears in the June 1, 2026 issue of Science News Explores.

Maria Temming is the Assistant Managing Editor at Science News Explores. She has bachelor's degrees in physics and English, and a master's in science writing.

Readability Score: 8.1

HS-ESS1-2, MS-ESS1-4