Tiêu đề: Listen to the crackle of ‘mini-lightning’ on Mars
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/listen-crackle-mars-lightning
--------------------------------------------------

Scientists suspected these zaps existed but had never detected them — until now

When Martian winds loft dust into the air, interactions between the grains can generate electrical fields. Those fields eventually discharge electricity.

MARK GARLICK/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY/Getty Images

By Nikk Ogasa

February 16, 2026 at 6:30 am

When the wind blows on Mars, electricity crackles through the air. And for the first time, scientists have detected this.

NASA’s Perseverance rover — aka Percy — captured the data. Its microphone recorded sounds and electrical interference from dozens of electrical discharges. They had been sparked by colliding dust grains.

Researchers shared their discovery November 26 in Nature.

The electric jolts were fairly small. Each was only about as strong as the shock from touching a doorknob on a dry, winter day. Still, they could pose a risk to future astronauts and electronics. They also could make it harder to search for Martian life.

It’s “like mini-lightning,” explains Baptiste Chide. This planetary scientist works at the University of Toulouse in France. These discharges are “centimeter-scale electric arcs,” he says. Each one that his team detected produces a crack and a shock wave.

There are thousands of kilometers (miles) of dust-storm fronts on Mars that can make these jolts, Chide says. So “we think there are plenty of these small discharges happening.”

When airborne particles slide against or bump into each other, their surfaces can become charged. (This is similar to what happens when you rub two balloons together.) On Earth, countless such interactions occur within sandstorms and volcanic ash plumes. Particle collisions build up electrical fields that eventually discharge as arcs of electricity.

The phenomenon is called triboelectricity (TRY-boh-ee-lek-TRIS-ih-tee).

For decades, lab tests and computer models had hinted at triboelectricity flashes within dust storms and dust devils on Mars. But none had confirmed it.

Chide and his colleagues previously recorded the sounds of a Martian dust devil. In them, they heard a loud clicking. At the time, they thought it was the sound of dust grains striking the microphone. But one day, Chide heard other scientists at a conference discuss Martian triboelectricity. That led to a shocking realization: Those clicks might have been zaps.

To find out, his team modeled the electrical interference that the rover’s microphone would pick up from a nearby discharge. Then they compared that to the actual interference the mic had picked up.

The signatures matched perfectly.

Excited, the researchers reviewed 28 hours of recordings taken over two Martian years. A total of 55 discharges occurred within about two meters (6.5 feet) of the microphone. Most occurred at the windiest times. Sixteen showed up during dust devils.

The largest zap packed 40 millijoules of energy, the scientists estimate. That’s similar to the zap of an electrical bug swatter.

“There’s no doubt in my mind that it was an electrical signal that they measured,” says Joshua Méndez Harper. This electrical engineer at Portland State University in Oregon did not take part in the new work. But Méndez Harper wonders if the rover may have influenced those electrical signals. Triboelectricity likely happens on Mars anyway, he says. But it might behave differently around a metal spacecraft.

The jolts won’t kill astronauts, Chide points out. But they could degrade spacesuits over time. Or they might disrupt spacecraft electronics and instruments.

What’s more, zaps could get in the way of searching for evidence of Martian life. The discharges may spark a reaction that creates oxidants. These types of chemicals can destroy organic molecules, Chide says. And they might be signs of life.

Percy is gathering rocks and soil for a future spacecraft to bring back to Earth. Those samples are likely protected. Some are nestled safely inside the rover’s metal skeleton. Others have been left behind on the ground inside metal tubes that should shield them from electricity, Chide says. Still, any of them might have been zapped prior to collection.

“This discovery calls for a next generation of instruments dedicated to measuring electric fields at the surface of Mars,” Chide says. That could help scientists find out how much electricity is zipping through the Red Planet’s atmosphere. And that could reveal more about what its effects might be.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

aka: An abbreviation for “also known as.”

arc: A curve, often mapping out what appears to be part of a circle.

ash: (in geology) Small, lightweight fragments of rock and glass spewed by volcanic eruptions.

astronaut: Someone trained to travel into space for research and exploration.

atmosphere: The envelope of gases surrounding Earth, another planet or a moon.

colleague: Someone who works with another; a co-worker or team member.

computer model: A program that runs on a computer that creates a model, or simulation, of a real-world feature, phenomenon or event.

data: Facts and/or statistics collected together for analysis but not necessarily organized in a way that gives them meaning. For digital information (the type stored by computers), those data typically are numbers stored in a binary code, portrayed as strings of zeros and ones.

degrade: To break down into smaller, simpler materials — as when wood rots or as a flag that’s left outdoors in the weather will fray, fade and fall apart.

disrupt: (n. disruption) To break apart something; interrupt the normal operation of something; or to throw the normal organization (or order) of something into disorder.

dust devil: A small whirlwind or air vortex over land that’s visible as a column of dust and debris.

dust storm: A moving, blowing cloud of dust carried by the wind.

electric field: A region around a charged particle or object within which a force would be exerted on other charged particles or objects.

electrical engineer: An engineer who designs, builds or analyzes electrical equipment.

electricity: A flow of charge, usually from the movement of negatively charged particles, called electrons.

electronics: Devices that are powered by electricity but whose properties are controlled by the semiconductors or other circuitry that channel or gate the movement of electric charges.

engineer: A person who uses science and math to solve problems. As a verb, to engineer means to design a device, material or process that will solve some problem or unmet need.

field: (in physics) A region in space where certain physical effects operate, such as magnetism (created by a magnetic field), gravity (by a gravitational field), mass (by a Higgs field) or electricity (by an electrical field).

generation: A group of individuals.

Mars: The fourth planet from the sun, just one planet out from Earth. Like Earth, it has seasons and moisture. But its diameter is only about half as big as Earth’s.

metal: Something that conducts electricity well, tends to be shiny (reflective) and is malleable (meaning it can be reshaped with heat and not too much force or pressure).

model: A simulation of a real-world event (usually using a computer) that has been developed to predict one or more likely outcomes. Or an individual that is meant to display how something would work in or look on others.

molecule: A group of atoms that represents the smallest possible amount of a chemical compound. Molecules can be made of single types of atoms or of different types. For example, the oxygen in air is made of two bound oxygen atoms (O2). Water is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom (H2O).

organic: (in chemistry) An adjective that indicates something is carbon-containing; also a term that relates to the basic chemicals that make up living organisms.

oxidant: A chemical that can oxidize — steal an electron — from another molecule as part of certain chemical reactions.

particle: A minute amount of something.

perseverance: The quality that allows someone to continue trying to do something even though it is difficult

phenomenon: Something that is surprising or unusual.

plume: (in environmental sciences) The movement of some gas or liquid, under the direction of gravity, winds or currents. It may be in air, soil or water. It gets its name from the fact that it tends to be long and relatively thin, shaped like a large feather.

Red Planet: A nickname for Mars.

A version of this article appears in the May 1, 2026 issue of Science News Explores.

Journal:​ B. Chide et al. Detection of triboelectric discharges during dust events on Mars. Nature. Vol. 647, November 26, 2025, p. 865. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09736-y.

Journal:​ N. Murdoch et al. The sound of a Martian dust devil. Nature Communications. Vol. 13, December 13, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-35100-z.

Nikk Ogasa is a staff writer who focuses on the physical sciences for Science News. He has a master's degree in geology from McGill University, and a master's degree in science communication from the University of California, Santa Cruz.

Readability Score: 7.5

MS-PS3-2