Tiêu đề: Physics explains why sneakers squeak on the basketball court
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/sneakers-squeak-basketball-court-physics
--------------------------------------------------

Shoe soles wrinkle in bursts that repeat thousands of times a second

The loud squeaks of basketball shoes develop as parts of the sole slip on the court surface. Those slips repeat thousands of times a second.

FreshSplash/Getty Images

By Emily Conover

March 31, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

The sounds of a basketball game don’t just include the smack of a bouncing ball, players’ shouts and the cheers of a crowd. They also feature lots of squeaking sneakers. Shoes make these sharp sounds as players abruptly stop or turn. Now, physicists understand why.

High-speed videos reveal that as a shoe slides on a floor, it goes through a stick-slip motion. Parts of the shoe’s sole stick in place as other parts slip forward. The shoe slips in bursts, as small regions of the sole wrinkle slightly and detach from the surface. The regular repetition of those pulses creates that squeak.

Adel Djellouli was part of a team that shared its findings February 26 in Nature. Djellouli is an applied physicist at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.

In their experiments, the researchers needed to see the sole of a shoe. So they scuffed it across a glass surface instead of a basketball court. Images from below captured the shoe’s sole. The images were bright where the sole touched the glass and dark where the shoe pulled away.

As a shoe goes through its stick-slip motion, they found, pulses of wrinkles travel along its sole. This is a bit like how a wrinkle might travel across a tablecloth as you snap it into place. But in the shoe, the pulses repeat about 4,800 times a second!

When a wrinkle meets the edge of the shoe, it smacks the surrounding air. That changes the air pressure. Repeated smacks make a regular change in air pressure, creating a sound wave.

The frequency of a sound wave determines its pitch. That is, how high or low it is. The pitch of a squeaking shoe matches the frequency of the bursts of slippage on its sole.

The researchers also tried sliding blocks of silicone rubber across the glass. This revealed that a sneaker’s tread needs ridges to make the sound. As a flat piece of rubber moved across the glass, it made chaotic pulses at uneven intervals. That produced a muddled noise, not a clear-pitched squeak.

Ridges guide the pulses along a shoe’s sole and help organize them. That’s what makes the pulses regular. Djellouli’s team confirmed this by sliding a rubber block with ridges across the glass. It made a clear squeak, just as a shoe would.

The researchers discovered other fun facts about sneaker squeaks, too.

The thickness and stiffness of a rubber block or a shoe sole, for instance, is what sets a squeak’s pitch. That discovery suggests a way to make silent shoes: Tune that squeak to an ultrasonic pitch. Humans can’t hear sounds that high. Shoemakers could do this by making the soles of their shoes thin. Or they could tweak the material used to make the shoe’s sole.

Those changes might not improve athletes’ game, though. Plus, people may not be able to hear ultrasonic pitches, but dogs can. So your “silent” sneakers might be pretty annoying for your pet, Djellouli says.

The researchers also designed rubber blocks that squeaked at specific pitches. Then, they used the blocks to play “The Imperial March” from Star Wars — the song that plays whenever Darth Vader comes on screen. That revealed another scientific truth. Darth Vader would have seemed much less scary if he had squeaky shoes.

air pressure: The force exerted by the weight of air molecules.

frequency: The number of times some periodic phenomenon occurs within a specified time interval. (In physics) The number of wavelengths that occurs over a particular interval of time.

physicist: A scientist who studies the nature and properties of matter and energy.

pitch: (in acoustics) The word musicians use for sound frequency. It describes how high or low a sound is, which will be determined by the vibrations that created that sound.

pressure: Force applied uniformly over a surface, measured as force per unit of area.

range: The full extent or distribution of something. For instance, a plant or animal’s range is the area over which it naturally exists.

silicone: Heat-resistant substances that can be used in many different ways, including the rubber-like materials that provide a waterproof seal around windows and in aquariums. Some silicones serve as grease-like lubricants in cars and trucks. Most silicones, a type of molecule known as a polymer, are built around long chains of silicon and oxygen atoms.

sound wave: A wave that transmits sound. Sound waves have alternating swaths of high and low pressure.

tune: (in engineering) Adjust to the right level.

ultrasound: (adj. ultrasonic) Sounds at frequencies above the range that can be detected by the human ear. Also the name given to a medical procedure that uses ultrasound to “see” within the body.

wave: A disturbance or variation that travels through space and matter in a regular, oscillating fashion.

Journal: A. Djellouli et al. Squeaking at soft–rigid frictional interfaces. Nature. Vol. 650, February 26, 2026, p. 891. doi: 10.1038/s41586-026-10132-3.

Science News physics writer Emily Conover studied physics at the University of Chicago. She loves physics for its ability to reveal the secret rules about how stuff works, from tiny atoms to the vast cosmos.

Readability Score: 6

HS-PS4-1, MS-PS4-2