Tiêu đề: Pokémon Go players helped build new maps of cities
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/pokemon-go-build-city-maps
--------------------------------------------------

Robots could soon begin using these maps to deliver pizza, groceries and more

Pokémon Go uses your phone’s location to figure out where you are as you walk around the real world. The game’s goal: Capture virtual critters that appear on your screen. But you can also upload images of the sights around you — which are being used to map cities for robots.

Wachiwit/iStock Editorial/Getty Images Plus

By Kathryn Hulick

May 19, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

Readability Score: 6.8

HS-ETS1-3, MS-ETS1-2

In your hometown, you can glance at a building or landmark to orient yourself. A new computer system uses artificial intelligence to do much the same thing. Called VPS 2.0, it’s a type of visual positioning system. It lets machines “look through a camera and know exactly where they are,” explains Brian McClendon. This system went global in April.

And if you’ve played Pokémon Go, you might have helped make it possible.

McClendon led the team that developed VPS 2.0 for Niantic Spatial, based in San Francisco, Calif.

In some cities, delivery robots will use VPS 2.0 to bring pizza or groceries to someone’s door. “We’re really excited [for the new system],” says George O’Brien. He leads product development at Coco Robotics, also based in San Francisco.

Robots delivering pizza sounds fun, says Kathleen Tuite, who does not work with either company. But she worries about our privacy. A system like this “could probably figure out where you are from certain kinds of photos,” she points out. Tuite is a software developer at ODK. This company, based in San Diego, Calif., helps make tools people can use to collect data.

Since VPS 2.0 only works live, there’s no way to put someone’s photos into the system, says a spokesperson for Niantic Spatial. As the system receives images from a camera in real time, it sends back a location. It also identifies the direction that camera had been facing — such as north, south, east or west.

To play Pokémon Go, someone walks through the real world looking at the screen on their device. It displays a map of their area. Virtual critters — called Pokémon — will appear there. You might capture a Pikachu, Charizard or (if you’re super lucky) a Galarian Zapdos. The popular game has been around for 10 years. Tens of millions of people around the world still play it each month.

Players can also scan public landmarks with their phones — such as a statue or a library. Scanning typically earns players rewards in the game.

But that’s not the end of the story.

Together, all those images and videos that players have captured end up showing what landmarks look like from all angles — and in all kinds of weather and lighting. These data were essential for building out VPS 2.0. If you did any of this scanning, McClendon says, you helped “to build technology that will now begin to guide real robots through city streets.” He stresses that scanning was always optional. (Players were also told their scans would be used to develop new technology.)

Last year, the company that makes Pokémon Go split into two. Niantic Labs now runs Pokémon Go and several other games. Niantic Spatial focuses instead on spatial intelligence — such as tools for mapping and finding locations.

In places where Niantic Spatial has detailed scans of buildings or landmarks, VPS 2.0 can determine the position of a camera on a robot or other device that is using the system to within centimeters (inches), McClendon says.

But the map also works near landmarks that people have not yet scanned. And that’s new.

To do this, the company developed an AI system that learns how to find a position from less detailed visual data. This system doesn’t need millions of scans of every new location. All it essentially needs is “a quick cheat sheet,” says McClendon.

Where did data for the cheat sheet come from? That’s a company secret, he says.

And this concerns Tuite. She wonders, what parts of our data are getting slurped up and used in ways that we don’t know about? We just have to hope, she says, that tech companies will handle our data with care.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

VPS should make it easier to navigate than GPS does, especially in dense cities.

That’s where Coco robots operate.

The robot looks like a pink “cooler on wheels,” notes O’Brien. Each can hold up to eight large pizzas or several bags of groceries — and has cup holders for drinks. To pick up or deliver an order, a Coco robot trundles along sidewalks until it reaches its destination.

Currently, to keep track of where they are, these robots rely on detailed maps and many different types of sensors. They also use GPS. It relays signals between several satellites in space and a single device on Earth. To identify where it is, the GPS system does some math, based on the time it takes those signals to arrive.

In open areas, GPS can figure out where a robot (or a phone or car) is to within about 4.9 meters (16 feet). But that system doesn’t work as well in cities. For one thing, city sidewalks are around 1.2 meters (4 feet) wide. So a GPS system usually can’t tell if a robot is on the sidewalk or in the street. Plus, if a GPS signal hits a big building, “it bounces off it a few times,” notes O’Brien. That can leave GPS-directed robots lost or confused. “Sometimes we might take a wrong turn and then need to go back,” he says.

The new VPS system, however, shines in this type of dense city environment. The reason: A city has recognizable landmarks everywhere. “Our VPS gives the robot a visual anchor,” says McClendon. “Instead of trusting a bouncing GPS signal, it looks at what its cameras see, matches that to our spatial model and knows within centimeters where it is.”

He and the Niantic Spatial team have been working with Coco to outfit its robots with VPS 2.0 tech.

Five years before Pokémon Go launched, Tuite pioneered the idea that ordinary people could help build a virtual map. Her game, Photo City, came out in 2011. Back then, she was a graduate student at the University of Washington in Seattle. Few cell phones had cameras at the time. So players snapped photos of buildings with digital cameras and uploaded them.

At one point, her university faced off against Cornell (in upstate New York) in a battle to see who could map the most of their campus this way. “I think Cornell ultimately won,” she says.

Once Pokémon Go launched, Tuite got into that game. She recalls scanning landmarks, but never got feedback on them. Players never learned if they had supplied good data, she says, or what their scans might be used for.

In Photo City, she points out, players knew exactly why they snapped pictures of buildings. They got to see the new section of a building they’d photographed appear on the virtual map. Tuite thinks that such an open, community-based approach to collecting data leads to more trustworthy tech.

What do you think?

angle: The space (usually measured in degrees) between two intersecting lines or surfaces at or close to the point where they meet.

artificial intelligence: A type of knowledge-based decision-making exhibited by machines or computers. The term also refers to the field of study in which scientists try to create machines or computer software capable of intelligent behavior.

cell: (in telecommunications) A technology that relies on a large number of base stations to relay signals. Each base station covers only a small area, which is known as a cell. Phones that rely on this system are typically referred to as cell phones.

context: The setting or circumstances that help explain an event, some statement or some conclusion.

develop: (n. development) To emerge or to make come into being, either naturally or through human intervention, such as by manufacturing.

digital: (in computer science and engineering)  An adjective indicating that something has been developed numerically on a computer or on some other electronic device, based on a binary system (where all numbers are displayed using a series of only zeros and ones).

environment: The sum of all of the things that exist around some organism or the process and the condition those things create. Environment may refer to the weather and ecosystem in which some animal lives, or, perhaps, the temperature and humidity (or even the placement of things in the vicinity of an item of interest).

feedback: A response or assessment that follows some a particular act or decision. Or a process or combination of processes that propel or exaggerate a change in some direction. For instance, as the cover of Arctic ice disappears with global warming, less of the sun’s warming energy will be reflected back into space. This will serve to increase the rate of Earth’s warming. That warming might trigger some feedback (like sea-ice melting) that fosters additional warming.

focus: (in behavior) To look or concentrate intently on some particular point or thing.

GPS: Abbreviation for global positioning system, which uses a device to calculate the position of individuals or things (in terms of latitude, longitude and elevation — or altitude) from any place on the ground or in the air. The device does this by comparing how long it takes signals from different satellites to reach it.

graduate student: Someone working toward an advanced degree by taking classes and performing research. This work is done after the student has already graduated from college (usually with a four-year degree).

intelligence: The ability to collect and apply knowledge and skills.

model: A simulation of a real-world event (usually using a computer) that has been developed to predict one or more likely outcomes. Or an individual that is meant to display how something would work in or look on others.

navigate: To find one’s way through a landscape using visual cues, sensory information (like scents), magnetic information (like an internal compass) or other techniques.

range: The full extent or distribution of something. For instance, a plant or animal’s range is the area over which it naturally exists. (in math or for measurements) The extent to which values can vary (such as the highest to lowest temperatures). Also, the distance within which something can be reached or perceived.

real time: A term that connotes immediacy; something is being studied, recorded and/or reported at the very time it is happening.

recall: To remember. (in commerce) A procedure whereby companies remove particular products from the market (i.e. store shelves) because the products were defective, dangerous or might pose some newfound risk of harm. Or a product that had already been purchased (such as a car or lawn mower) might be recalled so that a manufacturer could fix a problem in it or give people their money back.

robot: A machine that can sense its environment, process information and respond with specific actions. Some robots can act without any human input, while others are guided by a human.

satellite: A moon orbiting a planet or a vehicle or other manufactured object that orbits some celestial body in space.

sensor: A device that picks up information on physical or chemical conditions — such as temperature, barometric pressure, salinity, humidity, pH, light intensity or radiation — and stores or broadcasts that information. Scientists and engineers often rely on sensors to inform them of conditions that may change over time or that exist far from where a researcher can measure them directly. (in biology) The structure that an organism uses to sense attributes of its environment, such as heat, winds, chemicals, moisture, trauma or an attack by predators.

software: The mathematical instructions that direct a computer’s hardware, including its processor, to perform certain operations.

spatial: An adjective for things having to do with the space where something is located or the relationships in space between two or more objects.

stress: (in biology) A factor — such as unusual temperatures, movements, moisture or pollution — that affects the health of a species or ecosystem. (in psychology) A mental, physical, emotional or behavioral reaction to an event or circumstance (stressor) that disturbs a person or animal’s usual state of being or places increased demands on a person or animal; psychological stress can be either positive or negative. (in physics) Pressure or tension exerted on a material object.

system: A network of parts that together work to achieve some function. For instance, the blood, vessels and heart are primary components of the human body's circulatory system. Similarly, trains, platforms, tracks, roadway signals and overpasses are among the potential components of a nation's railway system. System can even be applied to the processes or ideas that are part of some method or ordered set of procedures for getting a task done.

technology: The application of scientific knowledge for practical purposes, or the devices, processes and systems that result from those efforts.

virtual: Being almost like something. An object or concept that is virtually real would be almost true or real — but not quite. The term often is used to refer to something that has been modeled by (or accomplished by) a computer using numbers, not by using real-world parts. So a virtual motor would be one that could be seen on a computer screen and tested by computer programming (but it wouldn’t be a three-dimensional device made from metal). (in computing) Things that are performed in or through digital processing and/or the internet. For instance, a virtual conference may be where people attended by watching it over the internet.

weather: Conditions in the atmosphere at a localized place and a particular time. It is usually described in terms of particular features, such as air pressure, humidity, moisture, any precipitation (rain, snow or ice), temperature and wind speed.

Meeting:​​ ​L. Bruns et al. ACE-G: Improving generalization of scene coordinate regression through query pre-training. ICCV 2025. October 19-23, 2025. Honolulu, Hawaii.

Meeting: K. Tuite. PhotoCity: training experts at large-scale image acquisition through a competitive game. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. May 7-12, 2011. Vancouver, BC, Canada. doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979146.

Kathryn Hulick is a freelance science writer and the author of Strange But True: 10 of the World's Greatest Mysteries Explained, a book about the science of ghosts, aliens and more. She loves hiking, gardening and robots.