Tiêu đề: The lives of black holes, from birth to death
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/black-holes-birth-death
--------------------------------------------------

A quest to understand the most bizarre objects in the universe unveils many surprises

Using powerful telescopes, astrophysicists can see bright flares coming from faraway black holes. This artist’s illustration depicts the black hole at the center of the Milky Way. Its intense gravity bends light around the black hole.

NASA, ESA, CSA, Ralf Crawford (STScI)

By Stephen Ornes

May 21, 2026 at 6:30 am

This is a human-written story voiced by AI. Got feedback?			
				Take our survey			.
			(See our AI policy 			
				here			.)

Readability Score: 7

HS-ESS1-1, MS-ESS1-2

Of all the strange and spectacular things in outer space, nothing is stranger or more spectacular than black holes.

These cosmic oddballs can’t even be described without contradiction. Unlike a typical hole, for instance, a black hole is not empty. Its core packs so much matter that its density is almost impossible to imagine. The smallest known black holes squeeze more than three times the mass of the sun into a volume about the diameter of a small city. One of the largest that scientists have found contains more than tens of billions of times the mass of the sun and stretches across a space bigger than the solar system.

Because it holds so much mass in such a small space, nothing that gets too close to a black hole can escape its gravity — not even light. Yet to find black holes, scientists must look for the brightest beacons of light in space. (This light is given off as the black hole feeds on nearby gas.)

Black holes have been known to devour stars, planets and even other black holes. The superstrong gravity of supermassive black holes allows them to hold giant galaxies together.

Scientists have been grappling with the strangeness of black holes for centuries. John Michell appears to be the first person to have predicted their existence. Back in 1783, he proposed there might be “dark stars” with gravity too strong for their own light to escape.

More than a century later, in 1915, Albert Einstein proposed his theory of general relativity to describe how gravity works. That theory predicted matter could collapse into a single point of infinite density — a black hole. Its mass would be so extreme that it would warp the space around it. The result: Anything passing nearby would be pulled into it.

Decades after Einstein introduced this idea, X-ray telescopes confirmed such weird objects exist. Researchers observed blasts of high energy as black holes fed. And in 2019, the Event Horizon Telescope captured the first direct image of a feeding black hole.

Yet some of the most basic questions about these cosmic monsters remain unanswered. Astrophysicists don’t know, for instance, why galaxies host giant black holes in their hearts. And then there’s those supermassive monsters. How did they get so gargantuan? In fact, “where do they come from?” asks Marta Volonteri. This astrophysicist at the Paris Institute of Astrophysics in France has developed models of how black holes might form. And there are no clear answers for how the biggest ones do, she says. After 20 years of searching, she says, “I still don’t know.”

Scientists also are working to explain how black holes change over their lifetimes and how they might eventually die. Powerful telescopes and models of the universe have offered up some good ideas. Yet the more scientists learn, the more they realize how little they know.

Black holes come in a range of sizes. Small ones contain up to 100 times the mass of the sun. Supermassive ones can have millions to tens of billions as much heft.

This size range poses a big problem in explaining how black holes form.

Traditionally, we have understood black holes to be “stellar corpses,” says Priya Natarajan. She’s an astrophysicist at Yale University in New Haven, Conn.

That seems to be true for the smallest ones, which scientists describe as “massive.” They form from stars with about 20 to 30 times the mass of our sun. As they’re dying, these big stars explode as supernovas, leaving behind black holes.

Scientists know basically how this works.

During active phases of their lives, stars fuse lighter elements into heavier ones, producing heat and light. Eventually, though, a star runs out of fuel. If it was the size of the sun, it will swell up as it dies. Later, it will collapse into a small, glowing core of oxygen and carbon.

But when bigger stars run out of fuel, look out! They’ll end up with an unstable iron core that keeps pulling in mass.

Eventually, that core will collapse under its own weight. This may trigger an explosive supernova. What’s left behind just keeps collapsing into an increasingly dense ball. Stars that started with between eight and 20 times the mass of the sun will collapse to make a neutron star. Its pressure crushes its particles together.

Bigger stars, though, become a black hole. (They may or may not go through a supernova phase first.) These are called “stellar-mass” or “massive” black holes. Astronomers predict that scattered around our galaxy are hundreds of millions of massive black holes.

They’re very different from the supermassive types often found at the centers of galaxies.

Sagittarius A* sits at the center of our Milky Way. This heavyweight carries as much mass as 4 million suns. The black hole at the center of Andromeda, our nearest galactic neighbor, has the mass of more than 100 million suns. The largest black hole known — TON 618 — contains 66 billion times our sun’s mass.

But even the largest stars don’t have nearly that much mass. So how truly monster black holes arise poses an interesting puzzle, says Natarajan: How could they get so enormous?

Black holes grow at least two ways, she notes. “They either gobble gas and material from around them, or they collide with other black holes.”

Galaxies are vast collections of stars. When they collide, the supermassive black holes at their centers may essentially fuse.

Here, “the black holes dance around each other and merge,” says Volker Springel. Now, he notes, “you’ve got a bigger one.” Springel is an astrophysicist at the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany. That dancing and merging happens frequently, he says. “So we expect, in the future, [we’ll get] slightly bigger black holes even than the biggest ones we have today.”

But not even collisions can explain how today’s supermassive black holes got so big, says Natarajan.

Observations of some of these behemoths suggest they formed when the universe was young. To get so big, they’d have had to grow stepwise from collision after collision after collision — or spend eons successively eating more and more stars and other mass entering their neighborhoods.

Yet, Natarajan points out, there’s simply not been enough time since the Big Bang for them to have grown that big if they were “starting from a piddly little stellar corpse.”

Surrounding every black hole is an event horizon. That’s a point of no return. Once any information — including light — passes that horizon, it can never be retrieved. That means scientists can’t analyze the contents of black holes to figure out how or when they formed.

Simply put, says Natarajan: “They don’t have any memory.”

Scientists have found other ways to study them, though. In the 2000s, Natarajan and other astrophysicists proposed that supermassive black holes might grow from giant black hole “seeds.” These might have formed from something other than a dying star.

Gravity might have collapsed a massive cloud of gas to form a black hole, even before it became a star. These black hole seeds — each with a mass of about 1 million suns — might have merged to quickly form larger ones. Seeds that formed right after the Big Bang, Natarajan says, might have had time to spin up into the supermassive black holes we see today.

“There are certain conditions under which you can have gas that will … directly collapse into a black hole,” she says. “It doesn’t have to go through a star stage.” The gas has to be made of pure hydrogen and helium, for example, with more gas constantly flooding in.

Volonteri of the Paris Institute has also studied the formation of such seeds and their potential to have produced what are now supermassive black holes.

In 2023, scientists spotted the bright center of a galaxy more than 10 billion light-years away. It was fueled by a black hole with the mass of about 40 million suns. It was so big, relative to the size of its galaxy, that scientists described it as “over-massive.” Even more impressive: This black hole likely formed when the universe was in its infancy (just a few hundred million years old).

That discovery, called UHZ1, fits with Natarajan’s models. It likely started as some giant black hole seed that formed after the collapse of an enormous cloud of gas.

To study how black holes evolve, scientists must get creative. By focusing on stuff that surrounds a black hole, they can make educated guesses on how the beast is behaving.

Stellar-mass black holes generally remain quiet and unchanging. Unless, that is, something begins to orbit too closely — such as gas, dust, a planet or a star. Then, the black hole’s strong gravity may rip the intruder apart and gobble it up. As remains of the intruder fall into the black hole, the disintegrating stuff burns up, producing bright bursts of radiation.

What’s happening in supermassive black holes is more puzzling. Most galaxies have a supermassive black hole at their center. No one knows which came first, the galaxy or the black hole. In fact, Natarajan suspects, they likely formed at the same time.

Watching how a galaxy changes, she says, can hint at how its black hole is behaving.

What’s more, “black holes are believed to be a major factor in galaxy evolution,” says Springel at the Max Planck Institute. For instance, supermassive ones can control the size of their host galaxy. If they didn’t, he says, this collection of stars — the galaxy — would “continue to get bigger and bigger.” And here’s why.

Dense clouds of hot gas move throughout a galaxy. As these clouds cool, they can condense to form stars. The Milky Way produces an estimated three or four new stars each year. So-called starburst galaxies can spawn hundreds per year.

But galaxies can’t grow infinitely large. “There’s a pretty hard maximum,” Springel says. It’s about 1 trillion times the mass of our sun. (A rare few are estimated to be 10 trillion solar masses.)

The reason for this limit may be that a black hole and a galaxy tend to grow in lockstep. The galaxy makes more stars. Then the black hole ingests more gas, stars or other nearby stuff and grows. As the black hole eats, it produces powerful jets of energy.

Scientists used to believe that all the jets’ energy would escape and “not do much damage to the galaxy,” says Springel. But computer models by his team and others now tell a different story.

Black holes can act like a thermostat for a galaxy, keeping the heat on, Springel finds. The jet’s bonus energy can superheat clouds of gas. When that happens, big galaxies can’t cool enough to form stars. “There’s a trickle of star formation sometimes left,” he says.

It’s different in smaller galaxies. Black holes that don’t produce so much energy can still give birth to new stars.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

Black holes lead dynamic lives. Within the last year alone, scientists have made several surprising discoveries. One team found evidence of a type of black hole collision so massive that scientists had thought it impossible. Other astronomers spotted a runaway black hole that had likely been booted from its galaxy — dragging a trail of newborn stars behind it.

The stars that produce massive black holes only live for a few million years. But their surviving black holes, models suggest, stick around for billions of years or more. With such lengthy lives, black holes have a long, long time to interact with each other and everything else.

Scientists predict that within the next 10 billion years or so, the Milky Way might merge with the Andromeda galaxy. (Estimates that this will happen range from less than 50 percent to near certainty.) If these galaxies merge, their black holes will, too, producing an even bigger one. Galaxies and their black holes elsewhere in the cosmos will continue colliding, too, says Springel — but likely not forever.

The universe is expanding. It’s unclear if that expansion will continue without end. But if it does, galaxies will get ever farther apart. If there’s a Milky Way-Andromeda merger, says Springel, this super-galaxy will become a kind of bright but dimming island in a vast sea of dark, empty space.

Eventually, “all the galaxies will stop merging with each other,” he says. “They’ll become isolated.”

For a while, they’ll keep making new stars. As those suns eventually die in supernovas, new black holes will form. In time, though, galaxies will run out of star-making stuff. All their stars will eventually run out of fuel — and go dark.

Some theories suggest that all the matter from dead stars and planets may also break apart. In the end, black holes may be the last survivors in our universe.

And even they may die.

In 1974, astrophysicist Stephen Hawking predicted that black holes could “evaporate.” That is, they could fall apart by gradually releasing radiation.

This evaporation would develop through a process described by a field of physics called quantum theory. It predicts that the emptiness of space undergoes fluctuations as tiny particles pop in and out of existence. Because of how these particles behave near the outer edge of a black hole — its event horizon — they can reduce its mass.

Although no one has directly observed Hawking radiation, the idea mostly fits with scientists’ current ideas about the physics of black holes.

“The smaller the black hole is, the quicker they will do this,” says Springel. At the end of the universe, the smallest black holes will be the first to shrink.

What happens next remains a mystery.

Supermassive black holes may evaporate one day, too — or not. Recent research suggests that some strange physics may halt their death throes. These theories suggest a black hole cannot lose all the “information” it had acquired. So their evaporation may stop once such beasts have lost half their mass.

Some physicists have proposed an even wilder idea: that a star may collapse into something called a black shell. It sort of mimics a black hole. Here, all the collapsing mass forms a dense outer shell. Inside would be what scientists call a “true vacuum” — a volume with the absolute lowest energy possible.

But that’s just an idea.

With every question scientists answer about how black holes form, live or die, they uncover new, even stranger questions. After all, they’re studying the most extreme things in all of nature.

Frustrating as it is, black holes “represent the end of knowledge,” says Natarajan. Simply put, she says, they’re “the edge of what we can know.”

Andromeda: A large spiral galaxy located 2.5 million light-years away that is similar in size and shape to the Milky Way.

astronomer: A scientist who works in the field of research that deals with celestial objects, space and the physical universe.

astrophysics: An area of astronomy that deals with understanding the physical nature of stars and other objects in space. People who work in this field are known as astrophysicists.

Big Bang: The rapid expansion of dense matter and space-time that, according to current theory, marked the origin of the universe. It is supported by astronomers’ current understanding of the composition and structure of the universe.

black hole: A region of space having a gravitational field so intense that no matter or radiation (including light) can escape.

carbon: A chemical element that is the physical basis of all life on Earth. Carbon exists freely as graphite and diamond. It is an important part of coal, limestone and petroleum, and is capable of self-bonding, chemically, to form an enormous number of chemically, biologically and commercially important molecules.

cloud: A plume of molecules or particles, such as water droplets, that move under the action of an outside force, such as wind, radiation or water currents.

condense: To become thicker, denser or to distill out the essence of something. This can occur, for instance, when moisture evaporates out of a liquid. Condense also can mean to change from a gas or a vapor into a liquid. (This can occur when water molecules in the air join together to become droplets of water.) It can also mean to identify the central meaning of something through analysis of data or through discussions.

core: Something — usually round-shaped — in the center of an object.

cosmos: (adj. cosmic) A term that refers to the universe and everything within it.

density: The measure of how condensed some object is, found by dividing its mass by its volume.

dynamic: An adjective that signifies something is active, changing or moving.

element: A building block of some larger structure. (in chemistry) Each of more than one hundred substances for which the smallest unit of each is a single atom. Examples include hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, lithium and uranium.

event horizon: An imaginary sphere that surrounds a black hole. The more massive the black hole, the bigger the sphere. Anything that happens inside the event horizon is invisible, because gravity is so strong that under normal circumstances even light can’t escape. But according to some theories of physics, in certain situations small amounts of radiation can escape.

evolve: (adj. evolving) To change gradually over generations, or a long period of time.

exotic: An adjective to describe something that is highly unusual, strange or foreign (such as exotic plants).

factor: Something that plays a role in a particular condition or event; a contributor. (in math) The numbers (or any algebraic expressions) that can divide another number (or expression) evenly, with no remainder. For example, 2 and 5 are factors of 10 (as 10 can be divided by 2 and give you 5, with no leftovers).  Ten's other factors are 1 and 10.

fluctuation: (v. fluctuate) Some type of change in a pattern or signal that varies at irregular intervals and often by amounts that are hard to predict.

fuel: Any material that will release energy during a controlled chemical or nuclear reaction.

fusion: (v. to fuse) The merging of two things to form a new combined entity. (in physics) The process of forcing together the nuclei of atoms. This nuclear fusion is the phenomenon that powers the sun and most other stars, producing heat and forging the creation of new, heavier elements.

galaxy: A group of stars — and usually invisible, mysterious dark matter — all held together by gravity. Giant galaxies, such as the Milky Way, often have more than 100 billion stars. The dimmest galaxies may have just a few thousand. Some galaxies also have gas and dust from which they make new stars.

gravity: The force that attracts anything with mass, or bulk, toward any other thing with mass. The more mass that something has, the greater its gravity.

Hawking radiation: The particles emitted from the event horizon on the outer edges of a black hole. Energy can be converted into a pair of particles. If that happens very close to outer edge of a black hole, one of those particles can tunnel out and become detected — providing the only direct physical clue to the black hole’s presence. These emissions are called Hawking radiation for Stephen Hawking, the famous British physicist who came up with the idea that black holes can emit particles.

helium: An inert gas that is the lightest member of the noble gas series. Helium can become a solid at -272 degrees Celsius (-458 degrees Fahrenheit).

hydrogen: The lightest element in the universe. As a gas, it is colorless, odorless and highly flammable. It’s an integral part of many fuels, fats and chemicals that make up living tissues. It’s made of a single proton (which serves as its nucleus) orbited by a single electron.

infer: (n. inference) To conclude or make some deduction based on evidence, data, observations or similar situations.

light-year: The distance light travels in one year, about 9.46 trillion kilometers (almost 6 trillion miles). To get some idea of this length, imagine a rope long enough to wrap around the Earth. It would be a little over 40,000 kilometers (24,900 miles) long. Lay it out straight. Now lay another 236 million more that are the same length, end-to-end, right after the first. The total distance they now span would equal one light-year.

mass: A number that shows how much an object resists speeding up or slowing down — basically a measure of how much matter that object is made from.

matter: Something that occupies space and has mass. Anything on Earth with matter will have a property described as "weight."

Milky Way: The galaxy in which Earth’s solar system resides.

model: A simulation of a real-world event (usually using a computer) that has been developed to predict one or more likely outcomes. Or an individual that is meant to display how something would work in or look on others.

mortality: Deaths. From mortal, meaning deadly.

orbit: The curved path of a celestial object or spacecraft around a galaxy, star, planet or moon. One complete circuit around a celestial body.

particle: A minute amount of something.

physics: The scientific study of the nature and properties of matter and energy. Classical physics is an explanation of the nature and properties of matter and energy that relies on descriptions such as Newton’s laws of motion. Quantum physics, a field of study that emerged later, is a more accurate way of explaining the tiny motions and behavior of matter about the size of electrons. A scientist who works in such areas is known as a physicist.

planet: A large celestial object that orbits a star but unlike a star does not generate any visible light.

profound: The quality of being great in magnitude or very intense. Or it can describe a person who is insightful and/or has great knowledge.

quantum theory: A way to describe the operation of matter and energy at the level of atoms. It is based on an interpretation that at this scale, energy and matter can be thought to behave as both particles and waves. The idea is that on this very tiny scale, matter and energy are made up of what scientists refer to as quanta — miniscule amounts of electromagnetic energy.

radiation: (in physics) One of the three major ways that energy is transferred. (The other two are conduction and convection.) In radiation, electromagnetic waves carry energy from one place to another. Unlike conduction and convection, which need material to help transfer the energy, radiation can transfer energy across empty space.

range: The full extent or distribution of something. For instance, a plant or animal’s range is the area over which it naturally exists.

relativity: (in physics) A theory developed by physicist Albert Einstein showing that neither space nor time are constant, but instead affected by one’s velocity and the mass of things in your vicinity.

simulation: (v. simulate) An analysis, often made using a computer, of some conditions, functions or appearance of a physical system. A computer program would do this by using mathematical operations that can describe the system and how it might change over time or in response to different anticipated situations.

solar: Having to do with the sun or the radiation it emits. It comes from sol, Latin for sun.

spawn: To quickly cause something to come into being.

star: The basic building block from which galaxies are made. Stars develop when gravity compacts clouds of gas. When they become hot enough, stars will emit light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation. The sun is our closest star.

stellar: An adjective that means of or relating to stars.

sun: The star at the center of Earth’s solar system. It is about 27,000 light-years from the center of the Milky Way galaxy. Also a term for any sunlike star.

supernova: (plural: supernovae or supernovas) A star that suddenly increases greatly in brightness because of a catastrophic explosion that ejects most (or sometimes all) of its mass.

telescope: Usually a light-collecting instrument that makes distant objects appear nearer through the use of lenses or a combination of curved mirrors and lenses. Some, however, collect radio emissions (energy from a different portion of the electromagnetic spectrum) through a network of antennas.

theory: (in science) A description of some aspect of the natural world based on extensive observations, tests and reason. A theory can also be a way of organizing a broad body of knowledge that applies in a broad range of circumstances to explain what will happen. Unlike the common definition of theory, a theory in science is not just a hunch. Ideas or conclusions that are based on a theory — and not yet on firm data or observations — are referred to as theoretical. Scientists who use mathematics and/or existing data to project what might happen in new situations are known as theorists.

thermostat: A temperature sensor that allows a system to know when a change — either heating or cooling — is called for.

trillion: A number representing a million million — or 1,000,000,000,000 — of something.

universe: The entire cosmos: All things that exist throughout space and time. It has been expanding since its formation during an event known as the Big Bang, some 13.8 billion years ago (give or take a few hundred million years).

warp: A change in the shape, usually due to some twisting or curving in a normally flat surface or plane. A piece of wet lumber may warp as it dries unevenly, causing it to bow or show a slight twist.

X-ray: A type of radiation analogous to gamma rays, but having somewhat lower energy.

Preprint: P. van Dokkum et al. JWST confirmation of a runaway supermassive black hole via its supersonic bow shock. arXiv. Submitted December 3, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.04166.

News report: J. O’Callaghan. Monster black hole merger is biggest ever seen. Nature. Vol. 643, July 15, 2025, p. 888. doi: 10.1038/d41586-025-02212-7.

Preprint:​ U. Danielsson, V. Mohan and L. Thorlacius. Black shell thermodynamics. arXiv. Submitted June 2, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.02117.

Journal:​ ​​P. Natarajan et al. First detection of an over-massive black hole galaxy UHZ1: Evidence for heavy black hole seed formation from direct collapse. The Astrophysical Journal Letters. Vol. 960, January 1, 2024. doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad0e76.

Preprint:​ U.H. Danielsson, G. Dibitetto and S. Giri. Black holes as bubbles of AdS. arXiv. Submitted May 29, 2017. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1705.10172.

Journal:​ M. Volonteri. The formation and evolution of massive black holes. Science. Vol. 337, August 3, 2012, p. 544. doi: 10.1126/science.1220843.

Stephen Ornes lives in Nashville, Tenn., and his family has two rabbits, six chickens and a cat. He has written for Science News Explores since 2008 on topics including lightning, feral pigs, big bubbles and space junk.