Tiêu đề: How to make a Bottle Rocket
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/making-a-bottle-rocket/
--------------------------------------------------

Did you know you can make and launch a water bottle rocket using just a plastic bottle, water, cork, needle adaptor and pump?

As you pump air into the bottle the pressure inside the bottle builds up until the force of the air pushing on the water is enough to force the cork out of the end of the bottle. The water rushes out of the bottle in one direction whilst the bottle pushes back in the other. This results in the bottle shooting upwards.

You can buy a kit with the parts except from from the pump and the bottle – please check the contents before buying

UK: https://amzn.to/2MBJuqj

US: https://amzn.to/2MBdfaS

Please make sure an adult is around as the rocket takes off very suddenly and forcefully as you can see in this video clip. Do not approach the rocket once you have started pumping even if it looks like nothing is happening.

As you pump air into the bottle pressure builds up inside. If you keep pumping, the force of the air pushing on the water eventually becomes strong enough to force the cork out of the bottle allowing water to rush out in one direction while the bottle pushes back in the other direction. This forces the rocket upwards.

Space rockets work in a similar way to the bottle, but instead of squirting water, they burn fuel to make a powerful jet of hot gas. The force of the gas downwards pushes the rocket upwards. This is a great demonstration of Newton’s Third Law.

Newton’s Third Law says:

‘for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction’

Issac Newton was an English scientist most famous for his theory of gravity, but he also worked out three laws of motion to describe how objects move. You can find out more about the Three Laws of Motion in my book, This Is Rocket Science which has lots of activities to demonstrate all three laws based around rockets and space.

Find out how to make a rocket mouse

Make a film canister rocket

Try one of these other easy air pressure experiments, including making a fake lung, a barometer and a coin popper!

Can you show a friend how to make a bottle rocket?

For more fun rocket science activities check out our new book This Is Rocket Science

Affiliate links

Images taken from This Is Rocket Science

Last Updated on May 11, 2023 by Emma Vanstone