Tiêu đề: FREE STEM Challenge Templates for Kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/free-stem-challenge-templates-for-kids/
--------------------------------------------------

STEM challenges are a fantastic way for children to learn in a hands-on, interactive way, hopefully sparking a curiosity and passion for science and technology.

My ever-growing collection of STEM challenges is free to download and covers a wide range of topics, from activities linked to stories like creating a bed for the Princess and the Pea to real world problems like designing a machine to clean rubbish from the ocean.

Most of the challenges use inexpensive and simple materials you probably already have at home, so you can get started straight away.

Use this for a general STEM challenge where children need to design, test and evaluate their creations.

I’ve left the title blank so you can create your own creative challenge!

The Princess and Pea story tells the tale of a Princess who can feel a pea through several layers of mattresses.

The challenge is to design, build and test a mattress so the princess can’t feel a pea! This is a lovely challenge for younger children that works well for a Fairy Tale theme or World Book Day.

Set a challenge to see who can launch a marshmallow the furthest, highest, or using a set amount of materials. This engaging, open-ended challenge is great fun for kids of all ages. To make a working catapult, kids need to think about how to build a stable base and a strong launching arm.

A lollystick catapult is a simple challenge, or a shoebox or larger catapult is a more ambitious idea.

Energy Transfer

Elastic potential energy

Gravity

Air resistance

Challenge students to think about the insulating properties of different materials with a fun Save the Ice Pop STEM Challenge.

The idea is to create a cover or shelter for an ice pop that slows down how fast it melts.

Changes of state

Insulation

Design a machine to clean up the oceans. Think about how to trap rubbish, but not marine life. This is a great activity for using recycled materials, which makes it easy and inexpensive.

Design a mini greenhouse made from recycled materials that lets light and air in but keeps pests out! The greenhouse must be stable and hold at least one medium-sized plant.

This activity is great for a plant or nature topic and challenges children to think about everything plants need to grow successfully. Children can watch seeds germinate, grow stems and leaves and eventually flowers and fruits.

Greenhouse walls trap heat from the sun to keep the plants inside warm. This is a great demonstration of the greenhouse effect.

Greenhouse effect

Photosynthesis

Plant structure

Germination

Water cycle

Find out which type of biscuit survives a dunk the best with this tasty challenge. Will your favourite biscuit survive a dunking or crack under the pressure?

All you need for this tasty challenge is a selection of biscuits and water. Dip the biscuits in water and watch to see which crumbles first.

Football fans will love the opportunity to create a waterproof football boot! This challenge gives children the opportunity to learn about waterproof materials in a real world context.

Print the free template, colour in the football boots and cover them with different materials ready for a water test!

Design and build a mini boat that can carry at least four coins without sinking. My Float a Boat STEM challenge is full of possibilities. Children can make a very simple boat with kitchen foil or use other recyclable items, perhaps even adding corks for extra buoyancy or waterproofing the outside of a cardboard box with other materials.

This challenge is part of my Around the World in 50 Experiments series. This challenge is for Christmas Island and asks students to build a bridge or tunnel to help red crabs reach the beach safely. Every year, around 40 million red crabs make the dangerous journey from the forest to the ocean. The main hazard for the crabs is roads!

There’s a significant amount space junk in orbit around Earth, which is a potential hazard to future space travel. Space debris can be large objects like retired satellites or smaller pieces from satellites that have collided.

This challenge asks children to design a device to clean up the mess.

The Three Little Pigs’ houses were blown down by the wolf. This challenge asks children to build and test houses made from different materials and think about how to test their strength.

There are two free templates available. One is aimed at younger children, and the other allows older children more freedom to embrace the creativity of this exciting STEM challenge.

Straw rockets need paper, tape, scissors and a straw. They fly easily off the end of the straw and are great for learning about forces and motion.

The straw rocket template means all you need to launch the rockets is a straw, tape and scissors.

Gravity

Trajectory

Air resistance

Design and build a freestanding basketball hoop to accompany a simple lolly stick catapult. The hoop must fit the ball used with the catapult.

Light table tennis balls work well for this challenge. The base of the basketball hoop should be stable enough to not fall over when the ball goes through the hoop.

Transfer of energy

Kinetic energy

Potential energy

Our parachute STEM Challenge sheet is a simple, one-page download with space to design two parachutes and record the time it takes for each to fall to the ground. Children can investigate with two parachutes of different sizes or made from different materials.

Gravity

Air Resistance

A chain reaction STEM challenge is one of my favourite STEM activities. It’s great for a rainy day, an engaging team-building challenge, or learning about momentum and energy transfer.

Momentum

Energy

Forces

My FREE themed STEM challenges are fun, inspiring and engaging themed challenges for all times of year.

This tasty STEM challenge encourages children to think about the strength and stability of structures as they build an edible snowman. It’s a delicious winter or festive STEM challenge.

A fun and festive chain reaction challenge. For example, roll sellotape into a bauble, then into dominoes and finally into a bell!

This is a great end of term challenge or just for festive fun at home!

If you try any of my STEM challenges, I’d love to see your creations. Please share on social media and tag Science Sparks!