Tiêu đề: Brain scans offer clues to why math is harder for some kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.snexplores.org/article/kids-brain-learning-math-numbers
--------------------------------------------------

Patterns in brain activity look different for kids with math learning disabilities

Kids with math learning disabilities solve math problems differently than other kids — but only when they work with number symbols. Those differences disappear when numbers are shown as dots.

Matt Chinworth

By Lily Burton

May 1, 2026 at 6:30 am

Some kids struggle with math more than others. Now, scientists have pinpointed some thinking processes and brain regions that might explain why.

In a new study, kids were given simple math problems. In earlier testing, some of these kids were found to have math-learning problems. Others had typical math skills. In the new study, those with a math learning disability tended to be less cautious about giving their answers. They also didn’t slow down after making errors, as the other kids did.

But with one small change to how math problems were written, those differences between how the two groups performed disappeared.

In a second test, the same kids were given problems with dots used to represent numbers instead of number symbols. Now the kids in the math-disability group didn’t rush to give their answers. They also slowed down after making errors, more like the other group.

Researchers shared these findings in the March 11 Journal of Neuroscience.

The idea that working with number symbols can be challenging for kids is not new, says Bert De Smedt. He did not take part in this new research. But he does study the neuroscience of learning at Catholic University Leuven in Belgium. Past data have shown “it’s the symbolic processing that is really the struggle” for kids with math troubles, says De Smedt. This study, he says, teaches us something new.

It shows that there are small differences in how kids with math learning disabilities approach problems. Those details, he says, could help explain why some kids struggle to process number symbols.

The kids in this study were all in second or third grade. All had first taken a standardized test with math questions. Those who performed poorly were assigned to a “math-disability” group. The rest were put in a group for kids with typical math skills. All kids were shown pairs of numbers (from 1 to 9) on a screen and then asked which was larger. Each time, they had a few seconds to answer.

The researchers recorded how long each kid spent answering the questions. At the same time, they scanned each child’s brain with an MRI machine. The resulting images showed which parts of the brain were most active as the kids worked.

The scientists also looked for subtle patterns in how kids answered math problems. They watched for how carefully they answered questions and how they acted after making mistakes.

“We weren’t necessarily interested in the performance of this task,” says Hyesang Chang. Rather, her team wondered how the two groups “may approach this task differently.” Chang is a cognitive neuroscientist at San José State University in California. She worked on the research while at Stanford University in the same state.

In looking at kids’ behaviors and brain activity, the scientists noticed something about the middle frontal gyrus. This brain region is involved in thinking about numbers and short-term memory. It was less active in the kids with math disabilities when they answered questions with less caution.

Another brain region — the anterior cingulate cortex — also stood out. It’s involved in finding mistakes and paying attention to how well we’re doing a task. When the kids in the math-disability group made errors and didn’t slow down afterward, this region tended to be less active.

Those patterns showed up only when the kids were working with number symbols. When they were instead shown groups of dots, their brain-activity differences went away. Kids with math learning disabilities had just as much activity in these two brain areas as kids with typical math skills.

Chang’s team can’t say for sure if the observed brain-activity patterns caused the kids’ difference in math abilities. But one thing is clear. There isn’t just one part of the brain that handles math and numbers.

The part of the brain that looks for mistakes also seems important, says Marie Arsalidou. A neuroscientist, she works at York University in Toronto, Canada. She studies childhood brain development. “We’re learning that there’s many regions involved” in doing math, she says.

Chang points to another big takeaway from her team’s new work. There are “hidden mechanisms” in how the brain handles math problems that may impact our performance.

In the future, kids could be taught to notice how they are solving problems, Chang says. Those who are struggling might be offered different problem-solving techniques.

Submit your question here, and we might answer it an upcoming issue of Science News Explores

anterior cingulate cortex: A part deep inside the brain located right between the eyes. This strip of neurons (nerve cells) surrounds a large white ridge in the center of the brain. The anterior cingulate cortex is important to many things, including helping to regulate your blood pressure. But it also plays cognitive roles too, helping us with decision-making, controlling impulses, regulating emotions and the intensity of our feelings for other people.

attention: The phenomenon of focusing mental resources on a specific object or event.

behavior: The way something (often a person or other organism) conducts itself or acts towards others.

cognitive: A term that relates to mental activities, such as thinking, learning, remembering and solving puzzles.

development: (in biology) The growth of an organism from conception through adulthood, often undergoing changes in chemistry, size and sometimes even shape.

MRI: Short for magnetic resonance imaging. It's an imaging technique to visualize soft, internal organs, like the brain, muscles, heart and cancerous tumors. MRI uses strong magnetic fields to record the activity of individual atoms.

neuroscience: The field of science that deals with the structure or function of the brain and other parts of the nervous system. Researchers in this field are known as neuroscientists.

short-term memory: (also known as primary memory) The small amount of memory held actively in the mind for a short period of time, such as the series of digits in a telephone number.

subtle: Adjective for something that may be important, but can be hard to see or describe. For instance, the first cellular changes that signal the start of a cancer may be only subtly different — as in small and hard to distinguish from nearby healthy tissues.

Journal:​ H. Chang et al. Latent neurocognitive mechanisms underlying quantity discrimination in children with and without mathematical learning disabilities. Journal of Neuroscience. Vol. 46, March 11, 2026. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2385-24.2025.

Lily Burton was the Spring 2026 science writing intern at Science News. She holds a bachelor’s degree in Molecular and Cell Biology and Anthropology from UC Berkeley. She also has a Ph.D. in Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics from the University of Chicago where she researched circadian rhythms in photosynthetic bacteria and the role they play in metabolism. She was a 2024 AAAS Mass Media Fellow where she reported on local science at WUNC – North Carolina Public Radio.

Readability Score: 7

HS-LS1-2, MS-LS1-8