Tiêu đề: 10 of the BEST Science Experiments for Kids
Đường dẫn: https://www.science-sparks.com/10-of-the-best-science-experiments-for-kids/
--------------------------------------------------

Here at Science Sparks, we’ve tried a lot of science experiments over the years; some have been brilliant on the first go, some have taken a LOT of tweaking, and some have been a complete disaster! Most have been great fun, whatever the outcome. To save you and your budding scientist the disasters, I’ve put together a list of the BEST science experiments for kids!

Up first is my mini baking soda powered rocket. A fun way to do this activity is to split it into two parts.

It needs to stand up with a gap between where the cork fits and the floor. Remember not to add too many decorations or it will be too heavy.

Experiment with different amounts of baking soda and vinegar to find the best rocket fuel!

The rocket must be placed on a hard surface to launch.

If you haven’t tried the good old skittles experiment, where HAVE you been?

Pour water over Skittles on a plate and watch as the colours dissolve from the candy into the water.

Investigate using different temperatures of water and even different types of sweets. If you have any Skittles left over at the end, another idea is to try some candy chromatography.

Babble Dabble Do has the most amazing version of this explosive science activity. Elephant toothpaste is always fun!

Everyone loves a fizzy potion, but it’s even better if you can get it to change colour!

If you use red cabbage indicator juice as the base liquid for a traditional baking soda and vinegar potion, it will change colour as it reacts.

Chromatography is a visual way to separate the different dyes in inks. All you need is some non-washable felt tip pens, filter paper and water. It’s a brilliant colourful science investigation for kids.

A fun twist on this activity is to use candy instead of felt-tip pens. Watch as the candy colours separate as they travel up the filter paper.

A Rube Goldberg machine uses the principle of a chain reaction to achieve an end goal. Examples are popping a balloon or delivering an item to someone.

A craft or lolly stick explosion is a fantastic group activity or science demonstration.

They take some time to set up but are worth the effort.

Oobleck is made from cornflour and water. It’s called a Non-Newtonian liquid as it feels solid when you squish it between your fingers but turns back into a liquid when the pressure is released.

This activity uses sugar cubes to learn about absorption and properties of materials, especially whether they are waterproof or not.

The idea is to build a tower of sugar cubes and test different materials to see which can save the higher cubes. It’s a lovely visual, hands-on experiment.

Do you know how to make an egg bounce?

First, you need to remove the shell by soaking the egg in vinegar. This leaves just the membrane behind. Once you’ve washed off the shell, you can bounce the egg.

Take care with this one, as eventually, the egg will break!

What do you think? Have I missed any? What would you add to the list? Perhaps a mento geyser?

Make dry erase pictures float with The Best Ideas for Kids.

Create a lens with jello and Science Fun.

Make a bouncy ball with The 36th Avenue, and then find out why balls bounce!

Set up a colourful fizzy rainbow with Messy Little Monster.

Make water travel down a string with Rookie Parenting.

Last Updated on April 9, 2024 by Emma Vanstone